On the mechanisms governing plasma
membrane organization - a STED-FCS
investigation
Dissertation
for the award of the degree
“Doctor rerum naturalium”
Division of Mathematics and Natural Sciences
of the Georg-August-Universit¨at G¨ottingen
submitted by
D´ebora Machado Andrade
from Aracaju, Brazil
G¨ottingen 2013
Prof. Dr. Stefan W. Hell (Reviewer)
Department of Nanobiophotonics
Max Planck Institute for Biophysical Chemistry
Prof. Dr. J¨org Enderlein (Reviewer)
Georg-August-Universit¨at G¨ottingen
Prof. Dr. Erwin Neher
Membrane Biophysics Department
Max Planck Institute for Biophysical Chemistry
Date of the oral examination: 06.01.2014
ii
Declaration
I hereby ensure that the presented thesis “On the mechanisms governing
plasma membrane organization - a STED-FCS investigation” has been writ-
ten independently and with no other sources and aids than quoted.
G¨ottingen, November 27th 2013
iv
Abstract
The plasma membrane is the barrier which localizes and separates life’s
processes from their external environment. Long described as a free stand-
ing two-dimensional ﬂuid mosaic, the organization of the plasma membrane
remains elusive.
Currently, the most prominent models proposed for its
organization lack a consistent body of evidence for their support. Here,
we present the ﬁrst validation of one of these hypotheses: the picket fence
model. Using the STED-FCS technique, we demonstrate that cortical actin
networks compartmentalize the diﬀusion of lipids in the plasma membrane
of cells. Interestingly, our results further indicate that the Arp2/3 complex
is a major regulator of the cortical actin networks, since inhibiting Arp2/3
leads to speciﬁc suppression of compartmentalized diﬀusion of lipids. Fur-
thermore, the extrusion of the actin cortex promoted by the introduction
of myelin-basic protein networks into cells causes lipid diﬀusion to be mod-
ulated by these networks instead. Conclusively, we have elucidated one of
the pivotal mechanisms governing the “ﬂuidity” of the plasma membrane
mosaic.
Zusammenfassung
Die Plasmamembran ist die Barriere, welche die fundamentalen Prozesse
des Lebens lokalisiert und von ihrer externen Umgebung begrenzt. Obwohl
die Plasmamembran lange Zeit als unabh¨angiges, zweidimensionales und
ﬂ¨ussiges Mosaik beschrieben worden ist, bleibt ihre tats¨achliche Organi-
sation unbekannt.
Den derzeit g¨angigen Modellen zur Beschreibung der
Plasmamembranorganisation fehlt eine ausreichend experimentelle Basis.
In dieser Arbeit pr¨asentieren wir zum ersten Mal eine tats¨achliche Veriﬁka-
tion eines dieser Modelle, n¨amliche des “picket fence models”. Mit Hilfe
der STED-FCS-Technik demonstrieren wir, dass kortische Aktinnetzwerke
die Diﬀusion von Lipiden in der Plasmamembran von Zellen kompartmen-
talisieren. Unsere Versuche deuten darauf hin, dass der Arp2/3-Komplex
ein Hauptregulator des kortischen Aktinnetzwerks ist, da eine Inhibition
von Arp2/3 zu einer speziﬁschen Unterdr¨uckung der kompartmentalisierten
Lipiddiﬀusion f¨uhrt. Zus¨atzlich bewirkt eine Auﬂ¨osung des kortischen Ak-
tinnetzwerks mittels der Einf¨uhrung eines Myelin-Basischen Proteinnetz-
werks in die Zelle, dass die Diﬀusion stattdessen durch dieses neue Netzwerk
moduliert wird. Zusammenfassend haben wir einen der zentralen Mecha-
nismen hinter der “Fluidit¨at” des Plasmamembran-Mosaiks untersucht und
aufgekl¨art.
vi
Para meus pais, Ivana e Augusto
E para meus av´os, Maria, C´elia, Antˆonio e Augusto
“E a coisa mais certa de todas as coisas
N˜ao vale um caminho sob o sol
E o sol sobre a estrada, ´e o sol sobre a estrada, ´e o sol”
C. Veloso
Contents
Glossary
xi
1
Introduction
1
1.1
Unravelling the plasma membrane of cells . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
1
1.1.1
A brief history of plasma membrane structure . . . . . . . . . . .
1
1.1.2
Plasma membrane dynamics and heterogeneity . . . . . . . . . .
4
1.2
STED-FCS: a powerful tool in the investigation of membrane dynamics
7
1.3
Aims of this dissertation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
11
2
Materials and methods
13
2.1
STED-FCS
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
13
2.1.1
STED-FCS setup . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
13
2.1.2
Calibration of the STED-FCS nanoscope
. . . . . . . . . . . . .
15
2.1.3
STED-FCS cellular measurements
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
16
2.1.4
STED-FCS analysis
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
18
2.2
Sample preparation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
21
2.2.1
Cell culture and transfection
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
21
2.2.2
Labelling procedures . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
21
2.2.3
Drug treatments . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
22
2.3
Monte Carlo simulations for STED-FCS measurements . . . . . . . . . .
23
3
Lipid compartmentalization at the plasma membrane
25
3.1
Lipid compartmentalization hypothesis . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
25
3.2
Detecting lipid compartmentalized diﬀusion via STED-FCS . . . . . . .
26
3.3
Investigation of molecular mechanisms underlying lipid compartmental-
ization . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
30
3.3.1
Cytoskeleton modulation signiﬁcantly impacts lipid compartmen-
talized diﬀusion . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
31
3.3.2
Cholesterol depletion and myosin II inhibition do not aﬀect lipid
compartmentalized diﬀusion . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
34
ix
CONTENTS
3.4
Discussion . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
34
4
Transient trapping of plasma membrane molecules
39
4.1
Lipid diﬀusion in myelin sheath . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
40
4.1.1
Myelin membrane sheets: a unique biological membrane . . . . .
40
4.1.2
Myelin basic protein modulates lipid diﬀusion in myelin mem-
brane sheets . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
42
4.1.3
Discussion . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
43
4.2
Nanodomain assembly of Ras proteins . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
45
4.3
What is trapping? - Nanodomains and the diﬀusion law . . . . . . . . .
47
5
Conclusions and outlook
51
5.1
Plasma membrane dynamics: perspectives for future research . . . . . .
53
References
55
Appendix A
63
x
Glossary
Dapp
apparent diﬀusion coeﬃcient
FCS
Fluorescence Correlation Spectroscopy
FRAP
Fluorescence Recovery After Photobleaching
FWHM
full width at half maximum
GalCer
galactosylceramide
MBP
myelin basic protein
SLBs
supported lipid bilayers
SM
sphingomyelin
SPT
Single-Particle Tracking
STED
Stimulated Emission Depletion
STED-FCS
Stimulated Emission Depletion Fluorescence Correlation Spectroscopy
xi
GLOSSARY
xii
1
Introduction
1.1
Unravelling the plasma membrane of cells
The plasma membrane of cells plays a main role in pivotal processes related to cell
function and maintenance of life itself, such as selective permeability, chemotaxis and
plasma membrane protein traﬃcking. Furthermore, plasma membrane dynamics are at
the core of cellular signal transduction pathways. The complexity and speciﬁcity with
which this structure enables this fundamental process has attracted increasing attention
to the investigation of its dynamical organization in the last decades. Despite about
ninety years of intense research, many of the mechanisms underlying plasma membrane
organization and function still remain elusive. Many proposed models which initially
enjoyed great acceptance and successfully explained experimental ﬁndings related to the
plasma membrane have been eventually proved wrong or incomplete. Currently, the
most accepted membrane-organizing principles are still highly debatable, indicating
that the state of the art of this ﬁeld is possibly still scratching the surface of the
organization of a highly complex system. Its investigation constitutes one of the most
fascinating scientiﬁc challenges of modern cell biology.
1.1.1
A brief history of plasma membrane structure
The plasma membrane of cells was ﬁrst reported to be formed by a double bilayer of
lipids by E. Gorter and F. Grendel in 19251. They postulated that the amphiphilic
nature of lipids requires a bilayer structure in order to be stabilized in membranes in
an aqueous environment. In this construct, in order to keep the lipids’ hydrophobic
tails away from the water that is both inside and outside of the cells, the lipids must
be arranged so that the polar groups form the outside of such a bilayer, with the tails
protected in the middle (Fig. 1.1 A). In order to test this hypothesis, they performed a
very elegant experiment aiming to quantify the amount of lipids per area in the plasma
1
1. INTRODUCTION
membrane. They extracted lipids from the plasma membrane of mammalian red blood
cells with acetone, and compared the area occupied by a monolayer formed by the
extracted lipids with the total area of red blood cells used in the experiment. The
measured ratio between the correspondent lipid monolayer and the total cell surface
area was precisely 2:1. Although Gorter and Grendel’s estimation of amount of ex-
tracted lipids and calculation of the surface area of eritrocytes was later reported to be
inaccurate to some extent2, this experiment set the foundations for intense subsequent
research in this ﬁeld, and furthermore became a remarkable example of the power of
biochemical ﬁrst principles applied to biology.
Further development in the theory of plasma membrane structure came in 1935,
when J.F. Danielli and H. Davson incorporated new ﬁndings on membrane tension and
plasma membrane protein content, as well as the concept of membrane permeability
and pore theory, into the lipid bilayer model proposed by Gorter and Grendel. As a
result, a new concept of the plasma membrane structure emerged3: Danielli and Davson
proposed that the plasma membrane comprised a lipid bilayer onto which a monolayer
of globular proteins was adsorbed onto both sides (Fig.1.1 B). In the membrane model
proposed by Danielli and Davson, membrane proteins were assumed to be globular due
to the then recent discovery of the pepsin globular structure by J.D. Bernal and D.
Crowfoot4.a
The advent of electron microscopy set a milestone in membrane research: for the
ﬁrst time, biological membranes could be imaged directly. In the late 1950’s, a new
paradigm for the organization of biological membranes was set by J.D. Robertson, a pi-
oneering electron microscopist5. Besides allowing the visualization of the plasma mem-
brane itself, Robertson’s micrographs showed that many other structures inside the cell
were also enclosed by membranes. His images showed the structures of all membranes
in the cell to be inherently similar, and this unique nature of biological membranes led
him to put forward his concept of the “unit membrane”. In fact, his model implied
more than the ubiquity of biological membranes. With a very bold and non-orthodox
model, Robertson hypothesized that the membrane was continuous within a cell, with
the plasma membrane being connected to all other internal membranes.b
Despite its initial popularity, the unit membrane model proposed by Robertson5 was
soon discarded. New developments in ﬁxation techniques for electron microscopy during
the 1960’s rendered images which discouraged the hypothesis of a continuum between
the plasma membrane and the membranes enclosing organelles.
Further knowledge
aThose were the very early days of protein structure determination, and in fact pepsin was one of
the ﬁrst proteins to be crystallized. The vast and prominent subsequent work on X-ray crystallography
by Crowfoot brought a wealth of knowledge of protein and lipid structures, which eventually rendered
her the Nobel Prize in Chemistry in 1964.
bOtherwise, Robertson’s unit membrane model kept the main features of Danielli and Davson’s
model, i.e., the plasma membrane was assumed to be formed by a monolayer of proteins adsorbed onto
both sides of a lipid bilayer.
2
1.1 Unravelling the plasma membrane of cells
Figure 1.1: Three models for the architecture of the plasma membrane - (A)
The lipid bilayer structure originally proposed by Gorter and Grendel. (B) The Danielli-
Davson model, featuring a layer of globular proteins adsorbed onto both sides of the lipid
bilayer. (C) The Singer-Nicolson model (ﬂuid mosaic model), featuring both peripheral
and integral proteins embedded in the lipid bilayer.
3
1. INTRODUCTION
about the plasma membrane and its constituents emerged from a wealth of studies based
on electron microscopy and biochemical techniques, and was uniﬁed by S.J. Singer and
G.L. Nicolson in 1972 in a new model for the plasma membrane architecture, called the
“ﬂuid mosaic” model6. This model deﬁnes the plasma membrane as a mosaic whose
matrix is the lipid bilayer, where proteins of diﬀerent kinds are embedded (Fig.1.1 C).
In this model, lipids and proteins are not static, but are assumed to diﬀuse, hence the
“ﬂuidity” of the ﬂuid mosaic model.
Many aspects contribute to the substantial novelty introduced by the ﬂuid mosaic
model in the ﬁeld of membrane research. By discarding the hypothesis of two protein
layers sandwiching a lipid bilayer and postulating instead that proteins are embedded in
the lipid bilayer, this model reconciled the protein content in biological membranes with
its thickness as determined by electron microscopy (between 7.5 and 9.0 nm, according
to the images then available).
In addition, biological membranes were for the ﬁrst
time considered to be a dynamic system, with all membrane constituents postulated to
undergo Brownian diﬀusion. The diﬀusion of membrane proteins was ﬁrst shown in 1970
by L.D. Frye and M. Edidin, who used immunoﬂuorescence to demonstrate that after
fusion of a mouse and a human cell, their speciﬁc membrane proteins were gradually
intermixed7. This experiment is one of the pillars in the foundation of the ﬂuid mosaic
model. The ubiquitous dynamical character of all membrane constituents was suggested
to be connected to fundamental processes of membrane function. Furthermore, for the
ﬁrst time, this model accounted for the thermodynamic stability of membrane proteins
and lipids, in which proteins were considered to be largely heterogeneous in molecular
weight and form of attachment to the lipid bilayer6.
1.1.2
Plasma membrane dynamics and heterogeneity
The discovery that plasma membrane molecules are not static, but in fact undergo
perpetual diﬀusion, initiated a whole new ﬁeld of research. Importantly, the plasma
membrane of cells is responsible for controlling the traﬃc of molecules into and out of
the cell, as well as being the ultimate interface where cell signalling takes place. In
fact, the ﬁrst work on signal transduction8 coincided in time with the ﬁrst work on
membrane dynamics7, both dating from the early 70’s. The dynamics of membrane
constituents, assumed to play a fundamental role in membrane function, emerged then
as an important phenomenon whose understanding could bring a wealth of knowledge
to numerous ﬁelds of cell biology.
The ﬁrst theoretical framework for the diﬀusion of membrane constituents came in
1975, when P.G. Saﬀman and M. Delbr¨uck considered the Brownian diﬀusion equa-
tions proposed by A. Einstein9 under the boundary conditions imposed by the plasma
membrane structure10 (as deﬁned by the ﬂuid mosaic model). Saﬀman and Delbr¨uck
concluded that diﬀusion in a highly viscous two-dimensional medium (the lipid bilayer)
4
1.1 Unravelling the plasma membrane of cells
surrounded by a low viscous medium (water) promotes diﬀusion that only weakly (loga-
rithmically) depends on the radius of the molecule. A corollary from this theory is that
proteins would be expected to diﬀuse with approximately the same diﬀusion coeﬃcient,
regardless of their size, and further that oligomerization of proteins would not impact
diﬀusion signiﬁcantly.
Numerous biophysical techniques using ﬂuorescent probes or gold particles were
conceived in the following years, pursuing the investigation of dynamics and interac-
tions of cellular molecules. Fluorescence Correlation Spectroscopy (FCS)11, Fluores-
cence Recovery After Photobleaching (FRAP)12, Single-Particle Tracking (SPT)13,14
and optical tweezers15 are examples of these microscopy-based techniques that would
later change the paradigms of the ﬂuid mosaic model. In particular, studies based on
FRAP, SPT and optical tweezers in the 80s and 90s rendered inaccurate the notion
that proteins undergo Brownian diﬀusion in the plasma membrane15–17, which was one
of the main assumptions of the ﬂuid mosaic model6. Instead, diﬀusion of proteins was
observed to be highly heterogeneous.
Gradually, the heterogeneity of lipid distribution throughout the plasma membrane
also became a more plausible hypothesis than the homogeneous lipid bilayer postu-
lated by the ﬂuid mosaic model. The ﬁrst evidence for lipid segregation came from
the discovery that diﬀerent types of lipids partition diﬀerently into the outer and in-
ner leaﬂets of the double bilayer of the plasma membrane18. Furthermore, epithelial
cells were found to be polarized, i.e.
their apical membrane features diﬀerent lipid
composition from the basal membrane19. In 1997, K. Simons and E. Ikonen put those
ﬁndings in a broader context of lipid self-assembly, putting forward a new construct
for plasma membrane organization, whose underlying principle is the self-association
of speciﬁc lipids into stable platforms20. They coined the term “lipid rafts” to de-
note these platforms, postulated to be regions of the plasma membrane highly enriched
in sphingolipids, cholesterol and lipid-anchored proteins. In lipid rafts, lipids are orga-
nized in liquid ordered phase (Lo), which is characterized by a high degree of acyl-chain
ordering21. Conversely, membrane lipids out of rafts are organized in liquid disordered
phase (Ld). According to the model introduced by Simons and Ikonen, lipid rafts are
assumed to have speciﬁc protein selectivity, increasing the probability of interaction of
non-abundant proteins and receptors, with lipid self-assembly being the driving force
for heterogeneity of distribution of membrane molecules.
Because the lipid rafts hypothesis could successfully describe a potential mecha-
nism for the most important cell membrane functions by proposing an elegant model
for membrane sorting, it has been enjoying vast acceptance by the scientiﬁc commu-
nity since its formulation, becoming one of the most important paradigms of modern
cell biology22. In fact, functions attributed to lipid rafts have spanned the manifold
functions ascribed to the plasma membrane, with several connections between these
5
1. INTRODUCTION
lipid platforms and diseases been postulated23,24. Nevertheless, the very existence of
lipid rafts is still debatable23,25. The foundations for the lipid rafts hypothesis relied
on experiments with detergent extraction of biological membranes, whose conclusions
were drawn into question by several studies25. Although recent advances in biophysical
techniques have later allowed a more compelling body of evidence21,22, more conclusive
proofs, such as the direct visualization of lipid rafts, as well as the determination of
their characteristic lifetime, are still missing.
Figure 1.2:
Combination of the two currently most prominent membrane-
organizing principles: lipid rafts and pickets and fences - Lipids in the raft phase
are in the liquid-ordered phase, whereas lipids out of the raft are in the liquid-disordered
phase. Diﬀerent types of membrane proteins are postulated to have diﬀerent aﬃnities to
lipid rafts. The sub-membranous cortical actin partially compartmentalize proteins and
lipids, including rafts.
In addition to the lipid rafts hypothesis, yet another major organizing principle has
been put forward to explain the dynamics of membrane molecules: the picket fence
model, proposed by A. Kusumi26. This model hypothesizes that the sub-membranous
actin cortex hinders the diﬀusion of transmembrane proteins, which tend to anchor
to the underlying actin ﬁlaments. These transmembrane proteins in turn constrain
the diﬀusion of other proteins and lipids, eﬀectively compartmentalizing the plasma
membrane. This model was proposed in view of SPT studies on membrane receptors16
and lipids27, which revealed compartmentalized diﬀusion on the surface of the plasma
membrane. Kusumi coined the term “hop diﬀusion” to denote this diﬀusion pattern.
Compartmentalization of membrane constituents was postulated to be implicated, for
6
1.2 STED-FCS: a powerful tool in the investigation of membrane dynamics
example, in localized signalling28. However, this model too remains controversial29.
While the notion of protein diﬀusion being constrained by the actin cytoskeleton seems
to be indisputable30, all supporting evidence for that lipids undergo compartmentalized
diﬀusion was so far provided exclusively by SPT experiments, in which artefact-prone
probes were used31.
Currently, lipid rafts and pickets fence are the most prominent models proposed for
the organization of the plasma membrane. These models are not mutually exclusive
(Fig. 1.2), and in fact can be uniﬁed in a hierarchical scheme that confers diﬀerent orga-
nizing principles to the diﬀerent spatial scales under consideration32. Furthermore, yet
other mechanisms of molecular organization at the plasma membrane have been pro-
posed. One such proposal suggested that nanoclusters of lipid-anchored proteins and
signalling proteins are ﬁrst assembled via interaction with dynamic actin ﬁlaments dis-
sociated from the actin cytoskeleton mesh and free to diﬀuse throughout the membrane
cortex33. This sorting mechanism would facilitate nanocluster assembling of membrane
proteins by using the same strategy which is attributed to lipid rafts: preferential inter-
actions of proteins to speciﬁc molecules increase their probability of interaction among
themselves, thereby facilitating nanoclustering.
In summary, research carried out in the last decades has revealed the plasma mem-
brane to be a profoundly complex dynamical system.
Continuous improvement of
biophysical techniques have brought important insights into this ﬁeld, but more sophis-
ticated methods are yet required to answer the yet unresolved questions. In particular,
limitations in spatio-temporal resolution of the available methods and limitations in the
available labelling strategies for probing membrane molecules still prevent the solution
of the most pressing questions. In the following section, a powerful technique with
great potential to shed light on important unsolved problems in membrane dynamics
is introduced.
1.2
STED-FCS: a powerful tool in the investigation of
membrane dynamics
Due to the wave nature of light, conventional ﬂuorescence microscopy is limited in
resolution by the diﬀraction of the converged beam that forms the focal spot. This
diﬀraction limit was ﬁrst put forward by E.K. Abbe, who calculated the resolution
limit of the microscope to be34:
d =
λ
2NA
(1.1)
where d stands for the achievable resolution by a microscope, λ is the wavelength of
light used for illumination of the sample and NA denotes the numerical aperture of the
microscope.
7
1. INTRODUCTION
Having become a standard law in optical physics, Abbe’s equation was reformulated
in 1994, when S.W. Hell proposed a new physical concept in ﬂuorescence microscopy
which eﬀectively renders this technique diﬀraction-unlimited: Stimulated Emission De-
pletion (STED)35. In this construct, ﬂuorophores within the diﬀraction-limited focus
become distinguishable by inducing them to transiently assume distinct ﬂuorescent
states36,37. The excitation beam causes the molecules within the diﬀraction-limited
spot to be sent to a ﬂuorescent state (S1). Subsequent STED illumination de-excites a
fraction of the molecules, which return to the non-ﬂuorescent ground state (S0). Typi-
cally, a doughnut-shaped beam is used for inducing this stimulated emission. Thus, the
collected ﬂuorescence originates solely from within a central area much smaller than
the diﬀraction limit. The photons emitted by stimulated emission can be separated by
appropriate ﬁlters from ﬂuorescence, by de-exciting at a wavelength suﬃciently larger
than the emission peak of the ﬂuorophore (Fig.1.3 A). The eﬀective resolution achiev-
able by this technique depends in principle only on the intensity of the STED beam at
the focal plane38:
dSTED =
dconf
q
1 + ISTED
Is
(1.2)
where dSTED stands for the resolution achievable by a STED microscope, dconf is the
diﬀraction-limited resolution of a confocal microscope, exciting at a given wavelength,
ISTED is the STED beam intensity at the focal plane and Is is a saturation intensity,
dependent on the ﬂuorophore and on the STED wavelength.
STED microscopy, being the ﬁrst concept to break the diﬀraction limit39, has sig-
niﬁcantly broadened the applicability of ﬂuorescence imaging to the life sciences in
the last years40–43. However, the applications of STED are not limited to imaging.
This ingenious concept will ﬁnd applications whenever overcoming the diﬀraction limit
in ﬂuorescence techniques is necessary or useful. A beautiful example that illustrates
this idea is the method of Stimulated Emission Depletion Fluorescence Correlation
Spectroscopy (STED-FCS), which emerges as a powerful technique to assess dynamics
of membrane molecules on the nanoscale44–46.
By combining FCS and STED mi-
croscopy, this technique is able to resolve membrane dynamics with unprecedented
resolution44,47,48.
STED-FCS shares the same theoretical principles of FCS. The ﬁrst realization of
FCS occured in 1972, with the seminal work of D. Magde, E. Elson and W.W. Webb11.
Nonetheless, its underlying probabilistic principles trace back to the development of
stochastic theory in the beginning of the 20th century. The following excerpt from the
review “Stochastic Problems in Physics and Astronomy” from 1943, by the prominent
physicist S. Chandrasekhar, illustrates that49:
“Suppose we observe by means of an ultramicroscope a small well-deﬁned element of
8
1.2 STED-FCS: a powerful tool in the investigation of membrane dynamics
Figure 1.3: STED-FCS assesses lipid dynamics on the nanoscale - (A) Jablonski
diagram illustrating the photophysics of stimulated emission depletion. Horizontal lines
represent the energy levels of the ﬂuorophore. After excitation to a higher electronic state
(e.g.
S1), ﬂuorescence is a spontaneous transition that brings the ﬂuorophore back to
the ground state (S0), usually to a low vibrational level. Stimulated emission is typically
implemented with light of a longer wavelength, that induces transition to one of the higher
vibrational states. In this way, experimental separation between ﬂuorescence and STED
beams is achieved by appropriate spectral ﬁlters. (B) A doughnut-shaped STED beam
(red) shuts down ﬂuorescence in the periphery of the confocal spot area (green), allowing
diﬀraction-unlimited FCS. In the experiments described in this work, the diameter of the
observation area, or full width at half maximum (FWHM), varied between 240 nm down
to <40 nm. (C) Experimental correlation curves for confocal and STED recordings. The
amplitude of the autocorrelation function, which is inversely proportional to the temporal
average of the number of ﬂuorescent molecules in the focal spot, exempliﬁes the decrease
in the eﬀective observation area for STED recordings.
9
1. INTRODUCTION
volume of a colloidal solution and count the number of particles in the element at deﬁ-
nite intervals of time τ, 2τ, 3τ, etc., and record them consecutively. We shall further
suppose that the interval τ between successive observations is not large. Then the num-
ber which is observed on any particular occasion will be correlated in a deﬁnite manner
with what was observed on the immediately preceding occasion. This correlation will
depend on a variety of physical factors including the viscosity of the medium: thus it
is clear from general considerations that the more viscous the surrounding medium the
greater will be the correlation in the numbers counted on successive occasions.”
Surprisingly, Chandrasekhar’s visionary construct deﬁnes the basic principles of FCS
with great accuracy. Or more precisely, it deﬁnes the principles of STED-FCS, which
is a diﬀraction-unlimited technique, by employing an “ultramiscroscope” in its experi-
mental realization, i.e. the STED microscope. In STED-FCS, photon counts stemming
from ﬂuorophore-labelled molecules diﬀusing through the focal spot are correlated in
time according to the formula50:
G(τ) = ⟨δF(t)δF(t + τ)⟩
⟨F(t)⟩2
(1.3)
where G(τ) is the autocorrelation function, F(t) stands for ﬂuorescence counts at a
time t and δF stands for ﬂuctuations of the ﬂuorescence counts with respect to the
average ⟨F(t)⟩. The autocorrelation function is a measure of the self-similarity of the
distribution of molecules in the focal volume over the time. This function provides
information about physical-chemical processes undergone by the ﬂuorescent molecules
in the relevant time scales. For example, characteristic dark state transitions, bind-
ing reactions and diﬀusion rates are typical processes assessed by the analysis of the
autocorrelation function51.
STED-FCS takes advantage of the improved lateral resolution provided by STED in
order to investigate diﬀusion of molecules on the plasma membrane on the nanoscale.
Since the lateral resolution of a STED microscope is correlated to the STED beam
intensity at the focal plane (Eq. (1.2)), STED-FCS allows the assessment of diﬀusion
in a tunable, diﬀraction-unlimited observation area (Fig.1.3 B,C). This represents an
exceptional breakthrough for spot-variation FCS, a method that discerns diﬀusion pat-
terns based on the relation among FCS recordings at diﬀerent sizes of the observation
area52,53. In this context, STED-FCS permits the realization of spot-variation FCS in
areas comparable in size to the putative lipid rafts and cytoskeleton-based submem-
branous compartments, supposedly the two major structures responsible for membrane
organization.
10
1.3 Aims of this dissertation
1.3
Aims of this dissertation
This work aims to elucidate the validity of the picket fence model, which hypothesizes
that cortical actin networks form compartments that partially segregate lipids and
proteins in the plasma membrane. This model, currently one of the most important
organizing principles for the plasma membrane, has been the subject of debate for many
years due to the fact that limitations in spatio-temporal resolution of the available
methods to probe membrane dynamics have precluded its validation.
In order to achieve this goal, we used STED-FCS, a diﬀraction-unlimited technique
which allows a systematic probing of molecular diﬀusion with high spatio-temporal
resolution. With spatial resolution below 40 nm, STED-FCS is able to resolve lipid
diﬀusion within the putative membrane compartments28,54.
This dissertation is organized as follows. In chapter 2, the methods and materi-
als utilized in this research are detailed. Chapter 3 presents the contentious aspects
of the picket fence hypothesis, and shows how we, for the ﬁrst time, validate that
model. Additionally, we determine the underlying cellular mechanisms that allow lipid
compartmentalization in the plasma membrane. Chapter 4 introduces the investiga-
tion of lipid diﬀusion in myelin membrane sheets and demonstrate that in this special
membrane, the underlying meshwork of myelin basic protein modulates lipid diﬀusion.
Furthermore, nanoclustering of Ras signalling proteins is observed. In chapter 5 the
ﬁnal conclusions of this work are made, and an outlook for further developments is
presented.
11
1. INTRODUCTION
12
2
Materials and methods
2.1
STED-FCS
STED-FCS was the method here utilized to investigate membrane dynamics.
The
STED-FCS setup and its calibration procedure, as well as details about cellular mea-
surements are described in the following.
2.1.1
STED-FCS setup
The STED nanoscope (Fig. 2.1) was based on a home-built confocal microscope setup
equipped with a 640 nm laser (∼100 ps pulse width, LDH-D-C-640, PicoQuant) for
excitation of the ﬂuorescent label with a repetition rate of 45 MHz. The STED beam
was provided by a mode-locked Titanium:Sapphire laser system (Chameleon, Coherent
Inc.) operating at 780 nm with a repetition rate of 90 MHz. The time interval between
the pulses of both lasers was adjusted using a home-built electronic delay unit, where
the STED pulses served as the trigger master. The STED laser pulses were stretched
from 200 fs to a pulse length of approximately 180 ps using four 30 cm optical SF6
glass rods and a 125m-long polarization maintaining single-mode ﬁber (OZ Optics).
The laser beams were spatially overlaid and the ﬂuorescence light ﬁltered by ap-
propriate (dichroic) ﬁlters (AHF Analysentechnik). The doughnut-shaped focal spot
of the STED beam featuring a central intensity zero was produced by introducing a
phase-modifying plate (RPC Photonics) into the beam path, imprinting on the wave
front a helical phase ramp exp(iϕ) with 0 ≤ ϕ ≤ 2π. The STED beam, initially Gaus-
sian shaped, acquires a toroidal conformation after being converged by the objective
lens. That is due to the fact that the phase retardation imprinted by the phase plate
on the wave front causes destructive interference along the optical axis upon conver-
gence of the beam. A λ/4-plate (B. Halle) ensured circular polarization of the STED
and excitation beams.
Fluorescence excitation and collection was realized using an
13
2. MATERIALS AND METHODS
Figure 2.1: Schematics of the STED-FCS setup - The STED nanoscope used in
the experiments reported in this thesis comprises one diode laser used for excitation of
the ﬂuorescent molecules and a Ti:Sa laser used for STED. Both excitation and STED
beams, after being collimated, are combined by appropriate dichroic mirrors. The emitted
ﬂuorescence is ﬁltered by a bandpass ﬁlter and split onto two avalanche photo diodes
(APDs). The cross-correlation between the signals originated by the APDs is done by a
correlator module. During the experiment, the STED beam power is varied by a software-
controlled laser power control (LPC) (Brockton Electro-Optics). The combination of λ/2
and λ/4 plates facilitates circular polarization for the excitation and STED beams.
14
2.1 STED-FCS
oil immersion objective (APON 60x, NA = 1.49, Olympus). A confocal pinhole was
provided by coupling the ﬂuorescence onto a multi-mode ﬁber (Fiber Optic Network
Technology). Additionally, this ﬁber splits the signal 50:50, which was then detected by
two single-photon counting modules (avalanche photo diode SPCM-AQR-13-FC, Perkin
Elmer Optoelectronics) and the recorded ﬂuorescence counts were further processed by
a hardware correlator card (Flex02-01D, Correlator.com). The intensity distribution
of the excitation and STED light were measured by scanning a scattering gold bead
of 80nm in diameter (gold colloid, EMGC80, BBinternational) using a non-confocal
detector (MP 963 Photon Counting Module, Perkin Elmer).
Figure 2.2: Experimental intensity distributions of excitation and STED beams
- A colloidal gold particle was used to scatter both excitation and STED beams, allowing
the visualization of their intensity distributions. This procedure facilitates the alignment
of the STED setup, which consists of spatially overlaying both beams, co-centered, and
ensuring the symmetry of their intensity distributions. Scale bars are 250 nm
2.1.2
Calibration of the STED-FCS nanoscope
The laser powers P were measured at the back focal plane of the objective. Together
with the full width at half maximum (FWHM) of the focal laser intensity distribution,
they allow the calculation of the time-averaged intensity I = P/[π(FWHM/2)2]. Cal-
15
2. MATERIALS AND METHODS
ibration of the diameter d(PSTED) of the eﬀective focal ﬂuorescence spots formed by a
certain STED power PSTED was performed by STED-FCS measurements of ﬂuorescent
lipid analogues in supported lipid bilayers (SLBs), for that such lipid bilayers provide a
two-dimensional free diﬀusing system of molecules, labelled with the same ﬂuorophores
used in our cellular experiments. The confocal FWHM being determined by ﬂuorescent
beads (d(PSTED = 0) ∼ 240 nm), the other eﬀective diameters d(PSTED ̸= 0) can be
calculated by performing STED-FCS measurements on supported lipid bilayers and
using the relation:
d(PSTED = 0)
d(PSTED)
=
s
tD(PSTED=0)
tD(PSTED)
(2.1)
where tD stands for the transient times correspondent to each given PSTED. The re-
lation above stems from the fact that the lipids in SLBs undergo two-dimensional free
diﬀusion, so that the diﬀusion time scales proportionally with the diﬀusion area.
The SLBs were prepared based on a procedure described in detail elsewhere55.
The lipid DOPC (1,2-dioleoyl-sn-glycero-3-phosphocholine, Avanti) and the ﬂuorescent
lipid analogue (DPPE-Atto647N, Atto-Tec) were mixed in organic solvents (Chloro-
form/MeOH 1:1) at a lipid concentration of ∼ 1 mg/ml. The ratio of labelled lipids
per non-labelled ones was approximately 1:10,000. 50 µl of such solution were dropped
onto a piranha-cleaned (Femto-RF, Diener Electronic) standard microscope cover glass
(diameter 22 mm, no. 1.5 thickness) and spin-coated at 60 Hz for about one minute.
The cover glass was then placed in a microscopy chamber and subsequently the dry thin
lipid ﬁlm was rehydrated with 500 µl buﬀer solution (150 mM NaCl, 10 mM HEPES).
Such bilayers were stable for several hours.
2.1.3
STED-FCS cellular measurements
We assessed the dynamics of ﬂuorescent labelled molecules by placing the focused co-
centered excitation and STED beams on random positions at the plasma membrane.
Near the edge of cells, lipid diﬀusion is probed concurrently in the apical and basal
membranes (Fig. 2.3 A). That happens because the eﬀective observation volume is
decreased only laterally by the STED beam, remaining approximately 700 nm long in
the axial direction (for excitation wavelength of 640 nm), encompassing both mem-
branes when they are close enough. In contrast, in the cell body of NRK cells, the
measurements were performed at the basal membrane, since the bulky cell body of
these cells features a separation between apical and basal membranes of ∼2 to 7 µm,
which ensures STED-FCS experiments to probe only the basal membrane (Fig. 2.3 B).
Measurements were taken at room temperature and completed before any signiﬁcant
morphological changes in the cell could occur.
All measurements were carried out
during 10 s, providing a correlation time two orders of magnitude longer than the
16
2.1 STED-FCS
Figure 2.3: Schematics showing two diﬀerent ways of probing lipid diﬀusion
with STED-FCS - (A) Near the edge of a cell, the distance between apical and basal
membranes is in the order of a few hundred nanometers56. In STED-FCS experiments,
the focal volume is reduced only in the x-y plane (diameter varying from 240 to 40 nm),
rendering its z dimension unaltered (∼ 640 nm). That implies that in lamellipodia, or
close to the cell edge, STED-FCS probes lipid diﬀusion in both membranes at the same
time, averaging them. (B) Conversely, when the separation between the membranes is in
the micrometer range (as it is the case in the cell body of many cells), STED-FCS ensures
to probe only the basal membrane.
17
2. MATERIALS AND METHODS
typical transient time of the labelled lipids through the confocal observation area. For
each cell analysed and for each observation spot diameter d (given as the full width at
half maximum (FWHM)), the calculated apparent diﬀusion coeﬃcient resulted from
the average of at least 5 and up to 8 repetitions of the STED-FCS measurements at
the given cell. Correlation data were recorded with lipid concentrations resulting in a
temporal average of particle number N ∼ 0.3 to 2 ﬂuorescent particles for the highest
STED power and N ∼ 10 to 30 ﬂuorescent particles for confocal recording.
2.1.4
STED-FCS analysis
In FCS, the ﬂuorescence signal, after being autocorrelated as described in Eq.(1.3), is
ﬁtted to a model which properly accounts for the physical nature of the dynamics under
investigation and for the photophysics of the ﬂuorescent label. We have used the dye
Atto 647N (Atto-Tec) as a label in all experiments to probe lipid diﬀusion. Therefore,
experiments on lipid diﬀusion were ﬁtted with the following model44:
G(τ) = 1 + 1
N GD(τ)GDS1(τ)GDS2(τ),
(2.2)
where
GD(τ) =
1
1 +

τ
tD
α
(2.3)
describes two-dimensional, one-component diﬀusion dynamics and the terms
GDS1(2)(τ) = 1 +
B1(2)
1 − B1(2)
exp

−τ
tDS1(2)

(2.4)
stand for the population of two dark states of the labelled molecule. Here, one of the
dark states is the triplet state, the other being an additional dark state, characteristic
of Atto647N-labelled lipids44.
In the equations above, τ is the time of correlation,
N stands for the temporal average of the number of molecules in the focal spot, tD
denotes the average transit time of the ﬂuorescent molecules through the focal spot, α
represents an anomalous diﬀusion exponent and B1(2) stand for the equilibrium fraction
of molecules in the correspondent dark state, with tDS1(2) being their characteristic
correlation time. Diﬀusion was considered to be two-dimensional for that in the spatio-
scale relevant for STED-FCS measurements (<240 nm), the plasma membrane can be
regarded as a two-dimensional sample.
For free diﬀusion, α equals 1. Nevertheless, this equality does not hold for non-
Brownian (anomalous) diﬀusion, due to the fact that for anomalous diﬀusion, the mean
square displacement ⟨r⟩2 of the molecule’s diﬀusion is not linear with time t, i.e.
⟨r⟩2 = 4Dapptα
(2.5)
18
2.1 STED-FCS
where Dapp is an apparent diﬀusion coeﬃcient.
Diﬀerently, for the investigation of diﬀusion of the Ras protein in the plasma mem-
brane, another labelling strategy was employed. In that case, SNAP-tagged H-rasG12V
proteins expressed in BHK cells were ﬂuorescently labelled with the Silicon-containing
rhodamine (SiR) dye57. Because the binding of the dye to the SNAP-tagged protein
does not occur in 100% of the cases, unbound dye may still remain on the surface of the
plasma membrane. For this reason, correlation data from experiments on Ras diﬀusion
were ﬁtted with a model of 2-component diﬀusion, where one of the components under-
goes free diﬀusion (the unbound dye) while the second component diﬀuses anomalously
(the SNAP-tagged H-rasG12V):
G(τ) = 1 + 1
N GD(τ)GDS(τ),
(2.6)
where
GD(τ) =
C
1 +

τ
tD1
 +
(1 − C)
1 +

τ
tD2
α
(2.7)
describes two-dimensional, two-component diﬀusion dynamics and the term
GDS(τ) = 1 +
B
1 − B exp
 −τ
tDS

(2.8)
stands for the population of the triplet state of the SiR dye. Above, C is the fraction
of dye molecules which are unbound, tD1 and tD2 are the average transit times of
molecules through the focal spot for unbound and bound dye molecules, respectively.
For the SiR dye, no population of further dark states was observed, reason why only
one dark state (the triplet state) was included in the model.
Concerning experiments on lipid diﬀusion, all correlation data were ﬁtted with Eqs.
(2.2-2.4), where the amplitudes and characteristic times of the dark states were pre-
ﬁxed parameters, since they depend only on the labelled lipid and its environment,
being independent of cell type or pre-treatments applied to the cells. Similarly, the
amplitude and characteristic time of the triplet state were pre-ﬁxed parameters in the
analysis of Ras diﬀusion. Speciﬁcally, the ﬁtted values of tD, along with the diameter
of the observation area, d, obtained through the calibration of the setup, allow for the
calculation of the apparent diﬀusion coeﬃcient (Dapp):
Dapp =
d2
8 tD ln 2.
(2.9)
When the apparent diﬀusion coeﬃcient is plotted as a function of the observa-
tion area, or analogously, of the full width at half maximum, three distinct diﬀusion
patterns can be discerned by STED-FCS, via the so called “diﬀusion law”: free dif-
19
2. MATERIALS AND METHODS
Figure 2.4: Three distinct two-dimensional diﬀusion patterns, discernible by
STED-FCS via the diﬀusion law - (A) Free (Brownian) diﬀusion, characterized by
constant Dapp, independent of the observation diameter. (B) Trapping diﬀusion, marked
by a decrease in Dapp as the FWHM is decreased (C) Compartmentalized diﬀusion, char-
acterized by an increase in Dapp as the FWHM is decreased.
20
2.2 Sample preparation
fusion, trapping diﬀusion and compartmentalized (or hop) diﬀusion48,52,53 (Fig.2.4).
Free (Brownian) diﬀusion is analogous to a two-dimensional random walk. Its diﬀusion
law is characterized by constant Dapp, that is independent of the observation diameter
(FWHM). Trapping diﬀusion is marked by trapping events, when the diﬀusing molecule
is transiently conﬁned to small regions where diﬀusion is hindered. One of the possible
physical constructs that represent this motion is a two-dimensional random walk with
mobile centers of short-range, weak attraction, where the mobility of the attraction cen-
ters is much lower than the mobility of the diﬀusing particles. This diﬀusion pattern
can be resolved by STED-FCS via its characteristic diﬀusion law, marked by a decrease
in Dapp as the FWHM is decreased52. Compartmentalized diﬀusion is analogous to a
two-dimensional random walk with partially reﬂecting barriers. In this diﬀusion pat-
tern, Dapp increases as the FWHM is decreased, for that in this instance less barriers
constrain the diﬀusion of molecules. Trapping and compartmentalized diﬀusion are two
examples of anomalous diﬀusion.
2.2
Sample preparation
2.2.1
Cell culture and transfection
IA32, NRK, IA32 2xKD, BHK and PtK2 cells were seeded on standard glass coverslips
(diameter 18 mm, no. 1.5 thickness) to a conﬂuence of about 60% and grown at 37 ◦C in
a water-saturated atmosphere of 5% CO2 in air. Primary cultures of oligodendrocytes
were prepared from postnatal day 1 mouse brains. The oligodendroglial progenitor cells
were grown for 7-10 days on an astrocyte layer, followed by the shake and subsequent
cultivation on the polylysine-coated glass coverslips in high-glucose Dulbecco’s modiﬁed
Eagle’s media (DMEM), complemented with bovine serum, penicillin/streptomycin,
glutamax, sodium pyruvate, triiodothyronine, L-thyroxine and B-27 supplement.
In order to transfect cultured PtK2 cells with MBP-GFP-TM construct, TransIT
(Mirus Bio LLC) was used, following manufacturer instructions.
Samples featuring
75% conﬂuence were preferably taken.
BHK cells were transfected using JetPRIME transfection reagent (Polyplus - trans-
fection) with the following plasmids: pmGFP-H-rasG12V, pmGFP-H-rasG12V-R169/
K170A or pmGFP-H-rasG12V-R128/135A. Plasmids were transfected alone or together
with plasmid pcDNA3-asGal-1 in the case of depletion, or with plasmids pmRFP-Gal-1
or pcDNA3-Gal-1 in the case of overexpression.
2.2.2
Labelling procedures
The following labelling procedures were used in the experiments here-forth reported:
Incorporation of ﬂuorescent lipid analogues into the plasma membrane
21
2. MATERIALS AND METHODS
for STED-FCS measurements: To enable incorporation into cellular membranes,
lipids of interest were primarily coupled to bovine serum albumin. Lipids were ﬁrst re-
constituted in chloroform/methanol solution, for storage in fractionated aliquots. In or-
der to have the lipids BSA-coupled, chloroform/methanol was aspired from one aliquot,
containing 75 nmol of lipid analogues. They were then redissolved in 10 µl of absolute
ethanol and vortexed vigorously. 1 ml of de-fatted BSA (in Dulbecco’s Modiﬁed Ea-
gle Medium DMEM without phenol-red, buﬀered with 10 mM HEPES) was added in
equimolar concentration to the lipids. Solution was centrifuged at high speed for 3 min
to remove residual clumps. Supernatant was stored at +8 ◦C. In order to incorporate
BSA-coupled lipid analogues into cellular membranes, cells were ﬁrst washed with 10
mM HEPES-buﬀered DMEM medium without phenol-red. Next, BSA-coupled lipid
analogues, diluted in HDMEM, were added in appropriate concentrations onto cells.
After incubation with the labelling solution for 30 min at +4 ◦C, cells were brieﬂy
washed with HDMEM. All lipid analogues used in our experiment were labelled with
the ﬂuorescent lipophilic organic dye Atto647N (excitation max at 645 nm, emission
max at 670 nm; Atto-Tec)44.
Labelling of MBP, actin and plasma membrane in oligodendrocytes and
PtK2 cells: To analyse the subcellular localization of the proteins and lipids of inter-
est in primary oligodendrocytes and PtK2 cells we performed immunocytochemistry.
The following antibodies were used in this study: rabbit polyclonal anti-MBP (DakoCy-
tomat, Carpinteria, CA, USA), phalloidin coupled to Rhodamine dye and WGA coupled
to Alexa-488 (Invitrogen). Secondary antibodies were purchased from Dianova.
Labelling of F-actin in IA32, IA32 2xKD and NRK cells: Cells were seeded
out on glass coverslips (no. 1.5 thickness) and allowed to adhere and spread for 20 h
after which cells were washed 3x in PBS, and ﬁxed in 4% formaldehyde in PBS for 10
min. Fixed cells were subsequently washed 3x in PBS, and permeabilized with 0.1%
Triton X-100 in PBS for 5 min. The cells were then blocked for non-speciﬁc binding by
treatment in 1% BSA in PBS for 10 min, washed 3x in PBS, and labelled with Abberior
STAR 635 phalloidin (1 unit in PBS with 1% BSA) for 10 min. Labelled cells were
washed 3x in PBS and mounted for imaging in Mowiol mounting media (6 g glycerol,
2.4 g Mowiol, 6 ml dH2O, 12 ml 0.2 M Tris pH 8).
2.2.3
Drug treatments
The following drug treatments were performed in some of the experiments presented in
chapter 3:
Cholesterol Oxidase: The cells were treated with 1 U/ml Streptomyces spec.
COase (Sigma-Aldrich) in HDMEM (and washed afterwards in HDMEM) for 30 min
under culture conditions. Treatment was performed before the insertion of the ﬂuores-
cent lipid analogues into the plasma membrane.
22
2.3 Monte Carlo simulations for STED-FCS measurements
Blebbistatin: Treatment with 15 µM Blebbistatin (EMD Millipore) in HDMEM
(and washed afterwards in HDMEM) for 2 h under culture conditions.
Latrunculin B: Treatment with 1 µM (100 nM) Latrunculin B (Sigma-Aldrich) in
HDMEM (and washed afterwards in HDMEM) for 15 min under culture conditions was
performed for IA32 cells (NRK cells). NRK cells were found to be more sensitive to this
drug treatment than IA32 cells, in a way that for these cells reduction of Latrunculin B
concentration to 100 nM produced similar results to 1 µM. Treatment was performed
before the insertion of the ﬂuorescent lipid analogues into the plasma membrane.
CK-666: Treatment with 100 µM CK-666 (EMD Millipore) in HDMEM (and
washed afterwards in HDMEM) for 4 h under culture conditions. Treatment was per-
formed before the insertion of the ﬂuorescent lipid analogues into the plasma membrane.
In addition, insertion of ﬂuorescent lipid analogues and STED-FCS measurements were
carried out in 100 µM CK-666 in HDMEM.
2.3
Monte Carlo simulations for STED-FCS measurements
Via custom written routines in Matlab, we performed Monte Carlo simulations to gen-
erate ﬂuorescence time traces of 2-dimensional diﬀusion of ﬂuorescent molecules diﬀus-
ing through an observation spot with a Gaussian-shaped ﬂuorescence detection proﬁle.
The diﬀusion area comprised randomly sized compartments. Within a compartment
the molecules were assumed to diﬀuse freely while crossing from one compartment to
another was only possible with a given “hopping probability” (Phop). This was imple-
mented in the following way: If free diﬀusion with diﬀusion constant Dfree would have
led the lipid to cross the compartment boundary, the eﬀective transposition would have
taken place in only a fraction of such cases (being deﬁned by Phop) while in all other
cases the molecule would be reﬂected back to the original compartment. The simula-
tion area was a circle of 3 µm diameter and the compartmentalization of this area was
implemented as a Voronoi mesh on a random distribution of seed points. We deﬁned
the square root of the average compartment area as the average compartment size (L).
The average compartment size, the hopping probability and the free diﬀusion coeﬃ-
cient completely describe our simulation model. In most cases a simulation placed 100
independent molecules in the simulation area and took a time span of 200 s with 20 µs
time steps.
The simulated ﬂuorescence time traces were auto-correlated and the correlation
curves were ﬁtted to the aforementioned two-dimensional diﬀusion model. The transient
time tD was converted to an apparent diﬀusion coeﬃcient using Dapp = d2/(8tDln(2))
with diameter d of the observation spot given as the FWHM. Fitting of the exper-
imentally measured Dapp(d) dependence was achieved by performing simulations on
iteratively ﬁner spaced grids based on the minimization of the squared distance to the
23
2. MATERIALS AND METHODS
measured values. After reaching an approximate accuracy of 1x10−10 cm2/s in Dfree,
0.01 in Phop and 5 nm in L, the program stopped running the iterations and displayed
the most pertinent set of ﬁtted parameters achieved.
24
3
Lipid compartmentalization at
the plasma membrane
In the last three decades, many important discoveries have changed our view of the
plasma membrane structure15,22,30,33,44,58. In this context, the cytoskeleton has emerged
as a key modulator of the lateral diﬀusion of membrane proteins.
The analogous
cytoskeleton-dependent lipid diﬀusion has been proposed26, but this remains a highly
debatable concept29. However, here we report the observation of cytoskeleton-modulated
compartmentalized diﬀusion of phospholipids in the plasma membrane of living cells
attained using a ﬂuorescent lipid analogue in combination with STED-FCS. Compart-
mentalized diﬀusion was in particular found to be dependent on the F-actin branching
nucleator Arp2/3. These ﬁndings provide solid evidence for that the Arp2/3-branched
actin cytoskeleton plays a pivotal role in the dynamical architecture of the plasma
membrane, potentially regulating its fundamental processes.
3.1
Lipid compartmentalization hypothesis
The ﬂuid mosaic model for biological membranes proposed by Singer and Nicolson in
19726 is a milestone in membrane research. Nevertheless, novel methods for probing
dynamics of molecular structures developed in the last decades have brought a wealth of
biological insight that contradicts the Singer-Nicholson model, particularly in the case
of the plasma membrane58. For example, Brownian diﬀusion of proteins and lipids,
being one of the main assumptions of that model, has been shown to be largely inaccu-
rate15,22,30,33,44,47,58. A variety of experimental techniques have shown that the lateral
motion of proteins in the plasma membrane is constrained by diﬀerent mechanisms,
many of them being ultimately connected to the cortical actin cytoskeleton15,30,52,59.
In addition, SPT experiments utilizing gold particles or quantum dots (QDs) have
further suggested that even phospholipid diﬀusion in the outer leaﬂet of the plasma
25
3. LIPID COMPARTMENTALIZATION AT THE PLASMA
MEMBRANE
membrane is constrained27,60, presumably by the cortical actin cytoskeleton.
In view of these ﬁndings, which suggest the structure and organization of the plasma
membrane to be strongly coupled to the cortical actin cytoskeleton, the picket-fence
model was proposed26. This model hypothesizes that the actin ﬁlaments underlying
the plasma membrane act as barriers that constrain the diﬀusion of transmembrane
proteins. The agglomeration of such proteins, anchored to actin ﬁlaments, would in
turn constrain the diﬀusion of other proteins and of lipids, creating thus cytoskeleton-
based compartments throughout the plasma membrane (Fig.3.1). The notion that the
cytoskeleton plays a main role in diﬀusion through plasma membrane and in plasma
membrane function ﬁnds resonance in important ﬁndings in membrane research. Stud-
ies performed on model membranes bound to a layer of actin mesh showed that diﬀusion
of lipids and proteins was hindered by the mesh, and that such reduction in mobility
was correlated to the actin density61. Nanoclusters of numerous membrane-associated
proteins were reported to be colocalized with actin62 and assembled via interaction
with dynamic actin ﬁlaments at the cortex33. Finally, the cytoskeleton was found to
be directly responsible for controlling the activity of structures like mechanosensitive
ion channels63.
Nevertheless, the picket-fence model has encountered several obstacles for its full
acceptance29,31,64. While compartmentalized diﬀusion of membrane proteins in living
cells was observed by diﬀerent methods, the same has not been conﬁrmed for phospho-
lipids, which was thus far only supported by SPT experiments27,60. In these experi-
ments, gold particles27 and QDs60 were so far employed in order to reach the required
temporal resolution. Such probes are artefact prone due to their prominent size (orders
of magnitude bigger than the lipids themselves), and due to the diﬃculty in validation
of their valence towards the target molecule, inducing possible oligomerization31,64. In
addition, the validity of SPT reports on compartmentalized diﬀusion was drawn into
question by a study showing that the irregularity of plasma membrane topography can
induce apparent compartmentalized diﬀusion, as observed by SPT65.
3.2
Detecting lipid compartmentalized diﬀusion via STED-
FCS
In order to elucidate the dilemma regarding lipid compartmentalized diﬀusion (also
called hop diﬀusion), we have applied STED-FCS to probe the diﬀusion of a phos-
pholipid analogue labelled with a small organic dye (Fig.3.3) in living cells, at high
temporal and spatial resolution. STED-FCS allows a systematic probing of molecular
diﬀusion with spatial resolution ranging from diﬀraction-limited 240 nm to below 40
nm, a range that is comparable in size to the postulated actin cytoskeleton mediated
compartments28,54.
26
3.2 Detecting lipid compartmentalized diﬀusion via STED-FCS
Figure 3.1: Plasma membrane compartmentalization hypothesis - (A, B) Repre-
sentative STED images of F-actin labelled with Abberior STAR 635 phalloidin in NRK and
IA32 cells, respectively. Scale bar is 1 µm. (C) Schematics showing branched networks that
partially conﬁne two-dimensional diﬀusion of molecules. Within compartments molecules
are assumed to diﬀuse freely, and in the event of hitting the boundaries of a compartment,
transposition to the adjacent compartment occurs with a certain hopping probability.
27
3. LIPID COMPARTMENTALIZATION AT THE PLASMA
MEMBRANE
Figure 3.2: In-silico STED-FCS experiments - Simulations show characteristic de-
pendencies of the apparent diﬀusion coeﬃcient Dapp on the full width at half maximum
(FWHM) of the observation spot, assuming a model for compartmentalized diﬀusion as de-
picted in Fig.3.1 C. As the FWHM is decreased, the apparent diﬀusion coeﬃcient increases.
Characteristic compartment size (L), free diﬀusion coeﬃcient (Dfree) and hopping proba-
bility (Phop) deﬁne the diﬀusion model. As it can be observed, only strong conﬁnement
(small Phop) renders clear patterns of compartmentalized diﬀusion.
28
3.2 Detecting lipid compartmentalized diﬀusion via STED-FCS
Figure 3.3: Lipid probes used in SPT and STED-FCS experiments - Schematics
of lipid probes used in SPT and in STED-FCS, put in perspective. Gold particle (∼40
nm in diameter) linked to lipid by Fab antibody and QD (∼20 nm in diameter) linked to
lipid via streptavidin, as often used in SPT. Both probes are functionalized via polymer
coating, which further enhances their eﬀective size. Possible oligomerization induced by
SPT probes is illustrated for the QD. STED-FCS lipid probe stands for a ﬂuorescent lipid
analogue (∼1 nm in diameter). Sketch with courtesy of Mathias Clausen, (University of
Oxford)
Validating the method, we ﬁrst performed in-silico STED-FCS experiments of dif-
fusion within a heterogeneously compartmentalized lattice with a characteristic average
compartment length L. Within compartments molecules were assumed to diﬀuse freely
with a diﬀusion coeﬃcient Dfree, while transposing compartment boundaries was pos-
sible with a certain “hopping probability” Phop.
These experiments show that the
compartment barriers slow down diﬀusion for observation diameters much bigger than
the compartments themselves. The reason for this is the increasing number of barriers
the probe has to transpose while diﬀusing through the focal spot. As the observation
diameter is decreased, the apparent diﬀusion coeﬃcient signiﬁcantly increases because
in this instance free diﬀusion inside the compartment is probed (Fig.3.2). Speciﬁcally
for small Phop, i.e. strong conﬁnement, compartmentalized diﬀusion can be clearly dis-
tinguished from free diﬀusion, which is characterized by a constant diﬀusion coeﬃcient
that is independent of the FWHM.
While compartmentalized diﬀusion of ﬂuorescent phospholipid analogues was not
observed in initial STED-FCS studies in live PtK2 cells44,47, we now report for the ﬁrst
time that it becomes evident via STED-FCS in two live cell types, NRK cells and in
IA32 cells (Ink4a/Arf (-/-) mouse ﬁbroblasts)66 (Fig.3.4). In this study, we used the
phospholipid di-palmitoyl-phosphoethanolamine (DPPE) labelled with Atto647N44,47.
Prominent compartmentalized diﬀusion of lipids has previously been reported by SPT
studies27,60 in these cell types, but those results had never been validated by any other
29
3. LIPID COMPARTMENTALIZATION AT THE PLASMA
MEMBRANE
technique or by the use of a less invasive probe, remaining thus far debatable.
Figure 3.4: Experimental observation of lipid compartmentalized diﬀusion by
STED-FCS - (A, B) Dapp(FWHM) dependencies for DPPE-Atto647N diﬀusion in NRK
and IA32 cells, respectively. Clear compartmentalized diﬀusion patterns are observed. ⋆⋆P
<0.01 (unpaired t test). Error bars are standard error of the mean. In A, n = 32 cells;
in b, n = 33 cells. Fitting of the experimental data resulted for both cell types Dfree =
0.8 µm2/s and Phop = 0.1. The characteristic compartment size was found to be 80 nm
for NRK and 150 nm for IA32 cells. Insets: representative voronoi lattices (red) relative
to the correspondent compartment sizes as well as simulated diﬀusion trajectories (blue)
correspondent to the ﬁtted parameters. Scale bars: 250 nm.
These STED-FCS experiments resulted in a clear pattern of compartmentalized
diﬀusion as indicated by a signiﬁcant increase of Dapp towards smaller observation
diameters. Monte Carlo simulations were used to ﬁt the experimental data to a model of
free diﬀusion constrained by a heterogeneously compartmentalized lattice. The ﬁtting
parameters that statistically best described the data were for both cell types Dfree =
0.8 µm2/s and Phop = 0.1, and L = 80 nm for NRK cells and L = 150 nm for IA32
cells.
3.3
Investigation of molecular mechanisms underlying lipid
compartmentalization
In order to assess the underlying causes for compartmentalized diﬀusion, we have sys-
tematically performed STED-FCS experiments on IA32 and NRK cells where the actin
cytoskeleton was modulated, membrane cholesterol was depleted, or myosin II activity
30
3.3 Investigation of molecular mechanisms underlying lipid
compartmentalization
was inhibited. Actin cytoskeleton modulation was achieved by treating cells with either
Latrunculin B (latB) or CK-666. These drugs perturb the actin cytoskeleton through
diﬀerent mechanisms: while latB prevents the polymerization of all types of F-actin
networks by sequestering G-actin, CK-666 is a recently discovered67 small molecule
that interferes with the dynamic cortical F-actin networks by speciﬁc inhibition of
the Arp2/3 complex, the actin nucleator that enables the creation of branched actin
networks68.
3.3.1
Cytoskeleton modulation signiﬁcantly impacts lipid compart-
mentalized diﬀusion
Cells treated with latB showed faster DPPE diﬀusion, markedly NRK cells (Fig.3.5 A,
C). Compartmentalized diﬀusion was still observed, although not strictly statistically
signiﬁcant at conﬁdence level 95% (Fig 3.5 B, E, and Appendix). Contrastingly, cells
treated with CK-666 showed remarkably faster DPPE diﬀusion, where the diﬀusion
coeﬃcient assumed approximately a constant value, independent of the observation
diameter (Fig.3.5 A, B, C, E), which is indicative of free diﬀusion.
In order to further investigate the eﬀects of Arp2/3 depletion in compartmentalized
lipid diﬀusion, we performed STED-FCS experiments on IA32 MEFs that had been
additionally depleted of p34Arc and Arp2 by use of a lentiviral shRNA knockdown
system (IA32 2xKD cells)66. The resulting dependence of Dapp(FWHM) is compatible
with free diﬀusion (Fig.3.5 D), reinforcing that Arp2/3 depletion suppresses compart-
mentalized diﬀusion. We have observed that DPPE diﬀusion in 2xKD is slower than in
CK-666-treated IA32 cells (Fig.3.5 E), possibly due to reduced membrane tension and
increased curvature in 2xKD cells, although this remains to be proven. In fact, these
two diﬀerent Arp2/3 depletion approaches render distinct conformations of the F-actin
cytoskeleton and overall cell shape (Fig.3.6).
In order to assess possible diﬀerences between lipid diﬀusion in the apical and
basal membrane of cells, due to the distinct conformations of the apical and basal
sub-membranous actin cytoskeleton56, we performed STED-FCS measurements in the
basal membrane under the cell body of NRK cells. These measurements resulted in
the observation of faster and slightly less compartmentalized diﬀusion, as compared to
the measurements encompassing both membranes near the cell edge (Fig.3.7). This
is consistent with a lower cortical actin density at the basal membrane, as compared
to the apical membrane, and/or to a lower cortical actin density in the cell body, as
compared to the edge of the cell56.
31
3. LIPID COMPARTMENTALIZATION AT THE PLASMA
MEMBRANE
Figure 3.5: Cytoskeleton depletion eﬀect on lipid diﬀusion in NRK and IA32
cells - (A) Eﬀect on lipid diﬀusion of Latrunculin B and CK-666 treatment in NRK cells.
(B) Summary of the data in A. (C) Eﬀect on lipid diﬀusion of Latrunculin B and CK-
666 treatment in IA32 cells. (D) Comparison of DPPE diﬀusion patterns, as observed by
STED-FCS, between IA32 and IA32 2xKD cells. (E) Summary of the data in C and D. ⋆⋆P
<0.01, ⋆P <0.05, NS, not signiﬁcant (two-tailed unpaired t test). Error bars are standard
error of the mean. Results of the statistical test on top of the columns representing FWHM
∼ 40 nm refer to comparison with the precedent column (FWHM = 240 nm). Results of the
statistical test on top of the columns representing FWHM = 240 nm refer to comparison
with the control (FWHM = 240 nm). n stands for the number of cells.
32
3.3 Investigation of molecular mechanisms underlying lipid
compartmentalization
Figure 3.6: Arp 2/3 depleted cells - (A, B) Representative STED images of F-actin
labelled with Abberior STAR 635 phalloidin in CK-666-treated IA32 cells and 2xKD cells,
respectively. (C) Untreated IA32 cell, for comparison. Scale bars are 3 µm.
33
3. LIPID COMPARTMENTALIZATION AT THE PLASMA
MEMBRANE
Figure 3.7: Diﬀerent patterns of compartmentalized diﬀusion in NRK cells -
Diﬀusion in lamellipodia and in the cell body, as observed by STED-FCS. ⋆⋆P <0.01, ⋆P
<0.05 (two-tailed unpaired t test). Error bars are standard error of the mean. Results of
the statistical test on top of the columns representing FWHM ∼ 40 nm refer to comparison
with the precedent column (FWHM = 240 nm). Results of the statistical test on top of
the columns representing FWHM = 240 nm refer to comparison with the control (FWHM
= 240 nm). n stands for the number of cells.
3.3.2
Cholesterol depletion and myosin II inhibition do not aﬀect lipid
compartmentalized diﬀusion
Inhibition of myosin II with blebbistatin and cholesterol depletion using cholesterol
oxidase (COase) had no eﬀect on DPPE diﬀusion, in neither NRK nor IA32 cells
(Fig.3.8). Myosin II works as a regulator for actin dynamics, allowing the cell to tune
its cortical actin mesh disposition. Blebbistatin is a small molecule which speciﬁcally
inhibits myosin II. The result that diﬀusion was unaﬀected by blebbistatin treatment
rules out myosin-based contractility as a reason for the observed compartmentalized
diﬀusion. In addition, the observation that DPPE compartmentalized diﬀusion was
unaltered after cholesterol depletion with COase indicates that compartmentalization
of lipids is not due to cholesterol-mediated interactions.
It has been reported that
cholesterol depletion may lead to detachment of the plasma membrane from the actin
cytoskeleton as a secondary eﬀect59 63. However, the level of cholesterol depletion used
in our experiments was not high enough in order to make this side eﬀect signiﬁcant.
3.4
Discussion
The fact that cytoskeleton-modulated, compartmentalized lipid diﬀusion could be clearly
observed by STED-FCS in NRK and in IA32 cells, but not in previously investigated
PtK2 cells44,47, poses the question of whether the membrane compartmentalization
34
3.4 Discussion
Figure 3.8: Cholesterol depletion and myosin II inhibition do not alter lipid
compartmentalization - (A, C) Cholesterol depletion and myosin II inhibition in NRK
and IA32 cells, respectively.
No signiﬁcant change in diﬀusion pattern occurred after
treatment with Cholesterol Oxidase and Blebbistatin. (C, D) Summary of the data. ⋆⋆P
<0.01, ⋆P <0.05, NS, not signiﬁcant (two-tailed unpaired t test). Error bars are standard
error of the mean. Results of the statistical test on top of the columns representing FWHM
∼ 40 nm refer to comparison with the precedent column (FWHM = 240 nm). Results of the
statistical test on top of the columns representing FWHM = 240 nm refer to comparison
with the control (FWHM = 240 nm). Here, n stands for the number of cells.
35
3. LIPID COMPARTMENTALIZATION AT THE PLASMA
MEMBRANE
exerted by the cytoskeleton is inherently cell type-speciﬁc, or a generic phenomenon.
To answer this question, we notice that compartmentalized and free diﬀusion is only
distinguishable by STED-FCS in cases where the average compartment size falls within
the size range assessed by this technique, and further that the conﬁnement strength
is suﬃciently large. In addition, compartmentalized diﬀusion combined with trapped
diﬀusion might further fade the observation of that diﬀusion mode53.
A combination of these factors can explain the observation of apparent free diﬀusion
for PtK2 cells, as our simulation model successfully describes DPPE diﬀusion on PtK2
cells47 with L = 25 nm, Phop = 0.25 and Dfree = 0.7 µm2/s (Fig.3.9). This explanation
is further experimentally supported by the fact that CK-666-treated PtK2 cells show
signiﬁcantly faster diﬀusion of DPPE, as compared to untreated cells (average diﬀusion
coeﬃcient of 0.63 µm2/s, contrasting to 0.40 µm2/s in untreated PtK2 cells), indicating
that also in this cell type lipid diﬀusion is modulated by the Arp2/3-branched actin
networks.
Figure 3.9:
Simulation model for phospholipid diﬀusion in PtK2 cells - (A)
Experimental DPPE diﬀusion coeﬃcient for diﬀusion in the plasma membrane of untreated
and CK-666-treated PtK2 cells (FWHM = 240 nm). ⋆⋆P <0.01 (two-tailed unpaired t test).
(B) In silico STED-FCS experiments for an average compartment size L = 25 nm, free
diﬀusion coeﬃcient Dfree = 0.7 µm2/s and hopping probability Phop = 0.25 and = 1. The
in silico data describes accurately the experimental FCS data for untreated and CK-666-
treated PtK2 cells. The curve correspondent to Phop = 1 can also be obtained by setting
L ≫ 240 nm. The region in yellow corresponds to the currently accessible FWHM range
for STED-FCS experiments. As can be observed, very small compartment sizes preclude
the observation of compartmentalized diﬀusion.
Previous studies by SPT using gold particles27 have shown that phospholipids
(DOPE) are compartmentalized in the plasma membrane of NRK cells in compart-
ments with a mean diameter of 230 nm, within which they diﬀuse freely with a median
diﬀusion coeﬃcient of 5.4 µm2/s. Also, previous studies by SPT using QDs60 have
36
3.4 Discussion
shown that most of DPPE molecules are conﬁned in IA32 cells within compartments
with a mean diameter of 150 nm, within which they diﬀuse freely with a median dif-
fusion coeﬃcient of 0.6 µm2/s. Now, for the ﬁrst time, those studies are validated
with a diﬀerent technique, utilizing a small organic dye as a lipid label. Diﬀerences in
the compartment sizes and diﬀusion coeﬃcient within compartments, as determined by
diﬀerent techniques, may stem from the diﬀerent probes utilized in each case. Never-
theless, our data is not satisfactorily described by our simulation model if the diﬀusion
coeﬃcient within compartments is ﬁxed to 5.4 µm2/s (Fig.3.10), as reported by Kusumi
and colleagues27. This suggests that the observation of such fast diﬀusion might be
induced by the large gold particle utilized in that experiment, which wobbles in the
extra-cellular medium where the viscosity is lower than in the plasma membrane by
two orders of magnitude31.
Figure 3.10: Comparing simulation parameters for phospholipid diﬀusion in
cells - (A, B) Experimental DPPE diﬀusion coeﬃcient for diﬀusion in the plasma mem-
brane of NRK and IA32 cells, respectively, and in-silico experiments based on diﬀusion
through a heterogeneously compartmentalized lattice. In both cases, the blue solid line
corresponds to the experimental data, the orange dashed line corresponds to the curve
that best ﬁtted our experimental data (without pre-deﬁned constraints), and the green
dashed line corresponds to the best ﬁt obtained with the constraint Dfree = 5.4 µm2/s. In
both plots, n stands for the number of measured cells.
In summary, STED-FCS has allowed a minimally invasive observation of lipid com-
partmentalized diﬀusion on the plasma membrane of living cells and has revealed with
unprecedented detail the underlying mechanisms that regulate such compartmentaliza-
tion. In particular, this study conclusively pinpoints the Arp2/3-complex as a regula-
tor of the compartmentalization observed in the plasma membrane. In fact, Arp2/3
is a major component in the orchestration of the numerous tasks performed by the
actin cytoskeleton, being involved in polymerization, organization and recycling of the
37
3. LIPID COMPARTMENTALIZATION AT THE PLASMA
MEMBRANE
actin networks69. Furthermore, recent studies using the Arp2/3 inhibitor CK-666 and
Arp2/3-depleted mammalian cells have revealed new roles of the Arp2/3-dependent
cortical cytoskeleton in a variety of cellular processes including matrix sensing, cyto-
plasmic streaming, spindle positioning and cell-cell junction regulation66,70–72. Here,
we demonstrate for the ﬁrst time the inﬂuence of Arp2/3 regulation on lipid diﬀusion
in living cells.
Following these results, we are compelled to infer that compartmentalization of
lipids by the actin cytoskeleton is a fundamental cellular process, independent of cell
type. Partial compartmentalization of membrane lipids and proteins may be associated,
for example, with localized signalling28. In this context, yet another form of conﬁne-
ment promoted by the cytoskeleton, i.e., one-dimensional diﬀusion of integral mem-
brane proteins along actin ﬁlaments, was shown to enhance the interaction probability
of less abundant proteins, thereby potentially triggering important cellular events73.
The determination of the precise structural and molecular mechanisms by which the
cytoskeleton performs lipid compartmentalization, as well as the mechanisms by which
it may be implied in fundamental processes such as cell signalling, are exciting open
questions that emerge from this evolving picture of the plasma membrane.
Concluding, a model for membrane organization that does not acknowledge the sym-
biosis between the plasma membrane and the cytoskeleton will be biologically oversim-
pliﬁed. Supporting the picket-fence model, our ﬁndings extend the organizing principles
proposed by the ﬂuid mosaic model by incorporating the underlying mechanism that
governs the “ﬂuidity” of the mosaic.
38
4
Transient trapping of plasma
membrane molecules
A remarkable feature of plasma membrane dynamics is that the diﬀusion of many
molecules is marked by trapping events44,47,74–76, which are characterized by transient
conﬁnement of molecules in small regions of the plasma membrane.
This diﬀusion
pattern is discernible from free and compartmentalized diﬀusion by STED-FCS via
the assessment of the apparent diﬀusion coeﬃcient, which for trapping diﬀusion de-
creases as the observation diameter is decreased52,53 (Fig.2.4 B). The precise nature
of these trapping events, i.e., the broad principles that govern this type of anoma-
lous diﬀusion, are poorly understood. Trapping diﬀusion has been attributed to, for
example, transient and cholesterol-assisted binding to other less mobile molecules or
molecular complexes (often referred to as nanodomains), interactions of membrane
molecules with the cortical cytoskeleton and long-range attraction between membrane
proteins44,47,77,78. Furthermore, transient conﬁnement of membrane molecules happens
on spatio-temporal scales that challenge currently available biophysical methods22,25.
Theoretical works can recreate trapping events based on a construct of nano-sized re-
gions of higher viscosity52,53, centers of short-range, weak attraction distributed across
the plane of diﬀusion79, as well as centers of repulsion80. This variety of possibilities
illustrate the diversity of physico-chemical backgrounds on which trapping diﬀusion
may rely. In this chapter, we examine two biological systems where trapping events (or
their absence) play a crucial role in plasma membrane function. Next, the theoretical
principles underlying the characteristic diﬀusion law for trapping diﬀusion are brieﬂy
discussed.
39
4. TRANSIENT TRAPPING OF PLASMA MEMBRANE MOLECULES
4.1
Lipid diﬀusion in myelin sheath
The myelin sheath is a modiﬁed extension of the plasma membrane of speciﬁc cells,
which insulates the axons of neurons by enwrapping them in a multilayered fashion.
While Schwann cells originate myelin sheath in the peripheral nervous system, oligo-
dendrocytes are responsible for providing the central nervous system with this special
membrane. Each myelin-generating cell envelops only one segment of the axon. Be-
tween adjacent myelin-wrapped parts of the axon, short portions are left uncovered,
the so-called nodes of Ranvier81. The combination of myelinated segments of axon
interspersed among nodes of Ranvier enables saltatory conduction, allowing high-speed
nerve impulse propagation82.
4.1.1
Myelin membrane sheets: a unique biological membrane
The history of myelin research is interconnected with the history of plasma membrane
investigation. The unit membrane model, proposed by J.D. Robertson, was inspired by
electron micrographs featuring a remarkable continuity of the laminar myelin sheath,
forming a spiral around cross-sectional images of axons5. When Singer and Nicolson
proposed the ﬂuid mosaic structure of biological membranes, they considered myelin as
a possible exception of their model, for which the ﬂuid character of membranes would
not apply6.
Figure 4.1: Oligodendrocytes - Cultured oligodendrocytes ﬁxed with PFA 4% + GTA
0.25% on day 5 and immunostained for MBP (cyan), rhodamine-phalloidin (red) and WGA-
488 leptin (green), for imaging of compact myelin sheets, actin and glycoproteins, respec-
tively. Glycoproteins and actin are absent in oligodendrocyte compact sheets. Scale bar is
10 µm. Images with courtesy of Olena Steshenko (Max Planck Institute for Experimental
Medicine, G¨ottingen).
Many factors contribute to the distinction of myelin membrane sheets from ordi-
nary plasma membranes: high abundance of lipids (80% of its dry weight) and low
amount of proteins, as well as a peculiar lipid composition (enrichment in long-chain
40
4.1 Lipid diﬀusion in myelin sheath
fatty acids, cholesterol and galactosylceramides83) are characteristics of myelin mem-
brane.
Importantly, myelin membranes are not supported by the sub-membranous
actin meshwork, as are plasma membranes in general. Instead, a meshwork compris-
ing myelin basic protein (MBP) underlies this membrane, deﬁning the morphology of
its architecture84,85. In this context, myelin emerges as a diﬀerential system in the
investigation of membrane-organizing mechanisms.
Here, we observe for the ﬁrst time lipid dynamics in myelin membrane, as well as
address the inﬂuence of the underlying MBP meshwork on lipid mobility.
Figure 4.2: Lipid diﬀusion in oligodendrocyte membrane sheets from oligoden-
drocytes and in PtK2 cells - (A-C) Dapp(FWHM) dependencies for respectively PE,
SM and GalCer diﬀusion in oligodendrocytes and PtK2 cells (n stands for the number of
cells). (D-F) Summary of the data. ⋆⋆P <0.01, ⋆P <0.05, NS, not signiﬁcant (two-tailed
unpaired t test). Error bars are standard error of the mean. Results of the statistical
test on top of the columns representing FWHM ∼ 50 nm refer to comparison with the
precedent column (FWHM = 240 nm).
In order to assess lipid dynamics in myelin, we investigated lipid diﬀusion in primary
cultures of oligodendrocytes, which form prominent myelin membrane sheets (Fig.4.1).
Upon culturing on the glass cover slips these cells reproduce two major domains of
in vivo myelin: ﬂat compact sheets that recapitulate myelin sheath, and non-compact
41
4. TRANSIENT TRAPPING OF PLASMA MEMBRANE MOLECULES
membrane processes. We used ﬂuorescent analogues of the saturated sphingolipids sph-
ingomyelin (SM) and galactosylceramide (GalCer), for that the correspondent endoge-
nous lipids are abundant in myelin and therefore may be assumed to play an important
role in myelin function. For comparison with a diﬀerent lipid group, we as well utilized
a ﬂuorescent analogue of the saturated phosphoglycerolipid phosphatidylethanolamine
(DPPE, here denoted by PE). The diﬀusion of these lipids has been previously inves-
tigated by STED-FCS in the epithelial PtK2 cell line, where free diﬀusion of PE and
prominent trapping diﬀusion of SM44 and GalCer47 was observed.
Lipid diﬀusion was observed to be in general faster in myelin membranes of oligo-
dendrocytes than in PtK2 cells (Fig.4.2). The phosphoglycerolipid PE was observed to
freely diﬀuse in both oligodendrocytes and PtK2 cells, with a small variation of the mea-
sured apparent diﬀusion coeﬃcients for diﬀerent observation diameters (Fig.4.2 A,D).
However, contrasting to lipid diﬀusion observed in PtK2 cells, sphingolipids did not
undergo strong trapping diﬀusion in oligodendrocyte membranes. In fact, SM diﬀusion
was observed to be much less hindered in this system (Fig.4.2 B,E). GalCer featured
trapping diﬀusion in myelin, however slightly less prominent than in PtK2 cells. A
possible measure for the assessment of the signiﬁcance of trapping events in diﬀusion
is the comparison between apparent diﬀusion coeﬃcients measured at diﬀerent obser-
vation diameters. In this context, GalCer trapping in oligodendrocytes is shown to be
weaker than in PtK2 cells for that the diﬀerence in Dapp at FWHM=240 nm and at
FWHM∼ 50 nm is greater for PtK2 cells. These results suggest less sources of conﬁne-
ment aﬀecting lipid diﬀusion in compact membranes sheets of oligodendrocytes than
in the epithelial PtK2 cell.
4.1.2
Myelin basic protein modulates lipid diﬀusion in myelin mem-
brane sheets
In the previous chapter it was demonstrated how the sub-membranous actin cortex
eﬀectively compartmentalizes the plasma membrane, modulating lipid diﬀusion.
In
this context, a system comprising a plasma membrane which is not bound to the actin
cortex, as myelin membrane sheets, may be expected to feature special characteristics.
In compact myelin membrane sheets, the underlying MBP meshwork possibly allows
membrane-organizing mechanisms distinct from the organizing principles of plasma
membranes supported by the actin cortex. In order to selectively investigate the inﬂu-
ence of the underlying MBP meshwork on lipid diﬀusion, we observed lipid diﬀusion in
PtK2 cells transfected with a chimeric construct consisting of MBP fused to GFP-label
and transmembrane domain (MBP-TM-GFP)84. In the transfected cells, MBP gets
anchored within the endoplasmatic reticulum membrane, and upon interactions with
the negatively charged lipids in the opposed plasmalemma, it creates MBP-positive
(MBP+) islands, highlighted by GFP. As in oligodednrocytes, MBP+ islands are de-
42
4.1 Lipid diﬀusion in myelin sheath
prived of cortical actin and glycoproteins84 (Fig.4.3). The portions of plasma membrane
of PtK2 cells within these platforms are henceforth referred to as “PtK2 MBP+”.
Figure 4.3: PtK2 cells transfected with the chimeric construct MBP-TM-GFP
- Visualization of platforms of MBP meshwork between the inner leaﬂet of the plasma
membrane and the endoplasmatic reticulum in PtK2 cells. Scale bars are 10 µm. Im-
ages with courtesy of Olena Steshenko (Max Planck Institute for Experimental Medicine,
G¨ottingen).
For each lipid type under investigation, diﬀusion in PtK2 MBP+ regions was signif-
icantly faster than diﬀusion in both oligodendrocytes and control PtK2 cells (Fig.4.4).
In addition, PE, SM and GalCer were observed to undergo free diﬀusion in PtK2 MBP+
regions, where trapping was completely eliminated. This result strongly indicates that
the insertion of MBP meshwork platforms onto the inner leaﬂet of the plasma membrane
decreases the sources of membrane lateral heterogeneities, promoting free diﬀusion.
4.1.3
Discussion
The fact that lipid diﬀusion is unconﬁned and remarkably faster in PtK2 MBP+ regions,
as compared to control PtK2 cells, is in line with less conﬁned and faster lipid diﬀusion
in oligodendrocytes, as compared to PtK2 cells. Moreover it indicates that lipid diﬀu-
sion is modulated by the underlying MBP meshwork. In myelin membrane sheets of
oligodendrocytes, fast diﬀusion may be hindered by the abundance of long-chain fatty
acids, which might increase membrane viscosity. The role of MBP in promoting fast,
unconﬁned diﬀusion is not assumed here to be necessarily an active one. Possibly, the
simple extrusion of the actin cytoskeleton facilitates unconﬁned diﬀusion. In fact, the
actin cytoskeleton, besides promoting compartmentalization in the plasma membrane,
has also been observed to be involved in trapping events. For example, SM trapping
diﬀusion in PtK2 cells was shown to be cytoskeleton-assisted, since treatment of cells
with Latrunculin B suppressed trapping47. Nonetheless, trapping of lipids with large
sugar head-groups such as gangliosides (or GalCer) were found to be less dependent on
43
4. TRANSIENT TRAPPING OF PLASMA MEMBRANE MOLECULES
Figure 4.4: Lipid diﬀusion modulated by MBP - (A-C) Dapp(FWHM) dependencies
for respectively PE, SM and GalCer diﬀusion in oligodendrocytes, PtK2, and PtK2 MBP+
cells (n stands for the number of cells). (D-F) Summary of the data. ⋆⋆P <0.01, ⋆P <0.05,
NS, not signiﬁcant (two-tailed unpaired t test). Error bars are standard error of the mean.
Results of the statistical test on top of the columns representing FWHM ∼ 50 nm refer to
comparison with the precedent column (FWHM = 240 nm).
44
4.2 Nanodomain assembly of Ras proteins
the cytoskeleton47.
Interestingly, in PtK2 MBP+ regions, all lipids investigated here diﬀuse (freely)
with approximately the same diﬀusion coeﬃcient. Thus, in these regions, distinctions
in diﬀusion characteristics that were before inherent to lipid types are not present any
more, with diﬀerent lipids diﬀusing similarly. Yet in this context, it is worth noting
that in PtK2 MBP+ regions, lipids diﬀuse at a diﬀusion coeﬃcient of approximately
0.8 µm2/s. This value corresponds also to the ﬁtted free diﬀusion coeﬃcient (Dfree) for
PE diﬀusion within compartments, in NRK and IA32 cells (Fig. 3.4). Furthermore,
as demonstrated in the previous chapter, upon CK-666 treatment PE diﬀuses freely in
NRK and IA32 cells with an apparent diﬀusion coeﬃcient of approximately 0.65 µm2/s.
All that provides compelling indications that the underlying cortical cytoskeleton plays
a critical role in membrane lateral heterogeneities, since either its depletion or extrusion
result in free diﬀusion at similar diﬀusion coeﬃcients.
However, these results also suggest the existence of other sources of conﬁnement
in the plasma membrane, additionally to the actin cytoskeleton, since also in myelin
membrane sheets of oligodendrocytes GalCer trapping diﬀusion was observed, although
slightly less prominent than in PtK2 cells.
Since this lipid is abundant in myelin,
it may be speculated that the interaction of GalCer with other lipids, and possibly
with proteins, plays a special role in the insulating and protective functions ascribed
to myelin. The diﬀusion in myelin membrane sheets of lipids with long-chain fatty
acids (21-24C) in their structure is an important question to be addressed in future
research, due to their high abundance in this membrane.
Here, we have employed
ﬂuorescent lipid analogues with short-chain fatty acids (16-18C) in their structures,
since the incorporation of long-chain lipid analogues into the plasma membrane of cells
is technically challenging. New protocols and methods facilitating this incorporation
may further help to shed light on membrane dynamics in this important biological
system.
4.2
Nanodomain assembly of Ras proteins
Ras is a family of proteins related to many signal transduction pathways. The malfunc-
tion or abnormalities in these pathways may compromise numerous activities necessary
for cell survival and replication, possibly allowing the abnormal cell proliferation that
leads to cancer. Due to that fact, many signalling proteins were ﬁrst discovered by
the identiﬁcation of their encoding genes, whose mutation was associated with can-
cer86. Ras were among the ﬁrst oncogenes to be discovered, and in fact about 20%
of all tumours present mutations in one of the Ras genes87. In humans, three Ras
genes encode four distinct proteins: H-Ras, N-Ras, K-Ras4A and K-Ras4B, where K-
Ras4A and K-Ras4B are originated from alternative splicing88. In its activated state,
45
4. TRANSIENT TRAPPING OF PLASMA MEMBRANE MOLECULES
Ras binds to guanosine triphosphate, whereas in its neutral state it binds to guano-
sine diphosphate. These two distinct states are in addition marked by conformational
changes. Oncogenic mutations make Ras proteins to be in a perpetual activated state
and consequently impair cell replication86.
Although interaction mechanisms of Ras proteins have been studied in detail89, rel-
atively little is known about speciﬁc interactions of these proteins in their native mem-
branous environment. In the ﬁrst steps of signal transduction, Ras is attached to the
inner leaﬂet of the plasma membrane by a 15-carbon farnesyl lipid tail90. Membrane-
bound Ras forms transient nanoclusters91, whose stability was reported to be regulated
by nanocluster-scaﬀolding proteins such as galectin-192. Importantly, nanoclustering of
Ras proteins was identiﬁed as a necessary step in Ras-mediated signal transduction93.
Mutants that represent diﬀerent conformers of Ras on the membrane were ob-
served to have diﬀerent aﬃnities to the nanocluster-scaﬀolding protein galectin-194.
In order to make a direct assessment of whether Ras conformers feature diﬀerent sig-
nalling characteristics, we investigated the impact of galectin-1 regulation on dynamics
of three H-Ras conformers in living cells.
In this study, we used H-RasG12V and
the orientation-mutants (mutants that feature a diﬀerent conformation) H-RasG12V
R169A/K170A and H-RasG12V R128A/R135A. Previous studies indicated that the
mutant H-RasG12V R128A/R135A was less reactive to galectin-1, while the mutant
H-RasG12V R169A/K170A was more reactive94.
For endogenous levels of galectin-1, STED-FCS revealed trapping diﬀusion for all
three conformers, consistent with anomalous diﬀusion experienced by these proteins
upon transient clustering (Fig.
4.5).
Upon down-regulation of galectin-1, trapping
was suppressed in the diﬀusion of all three conformers. In particular, the orientation-
mutant H-RasG12V R169A/K170A featured a completely diﬀerent diﬀusion pattern
upon galectin-1 depletion, resembling compartmentalized diﬀusion. This is consistent
with galectin-1 regulation aﬀecting more signiﬁcantly the dynamics of this orientation-
mutant than the other conformers. Upon up-regulation of galectin-1, trapping diﬀusion
was observed in all conformers, slightly more prominently for the mutant H-RasG12V
R169A/K170A.
In summary, STED-FCS evidenced that the diﬀusion of Ras proteins is regulated by
galectin-1, consistent with previous studies which suggested this protein to stabilize Ras
nanoclusters. Diﬀusion of the orientation-mutant H-RasG12V R169A/K170A was ob-
served to be more aﬀected by the cellular concentration of galectin-1 than the diﬀusion
of the other conformers. Since Ras-mediated signal transduction relies on nanocluster
assemblies, these results indicate that mutations that aﬀect only the conformation of
Ras proteins may signiﬁcantly impact their ability to mediate signalling events.
46
4.3 What is trapping? - Nanodomains and the diﬀusion law
Figure
4.5:
Dynamics
of
three
distinct
H-Ras
orientation-mutants
-
Dapp(FWHM) dependencies for H-Ras orientation-mutants show that galectin-1 (Gal-1)
modulates the trapping strength of Ras diﬀusion. Furthermore, diﬀerent conformers have
diﬀerent sensitivities to Gal-1 regulation.
4.3
What is trapping? - Nanodomains and the diﬀusion
law
STED-FCS is the diﬀraction-unlimited version of a general approach named spot-
variation FCS53. In this approach, the apparent diﬀusion coeﬃcient obtained through
systematic FCS measurements in diﬀerent observation diameters allows discerning com-
partmentalized, free and trapping diﬀusion52,53. Trapping diﬀusion is characterized in
this method by a decrease in apparent diﬀusion coeﬃcient as the observation area is
decreased. Intuitively this dependency seems questionable, contrarily to the character-
istic diﬀusion laws for free and compartmentalized diﬀusion, whose physical intuition
seems straightforward. Otherwise stated, one could ask the following important ques-
tion: How to compare the FCS data provided by a confocal measurement and the
collection of data provided by several sub-diﬀraction FCS measurements?
If these
two sets of data are in principle diﬀerent, we would have a clear statistical percep-
tion that the experiments carried out at sub-diﬀraction areas and those carried out
at diﬀraction-limited areas possibly assess information of a diﬀerent nature, given the
boundary conditions of our system. For free diﬀusion, these two sets of data assess
the same information, whereas for compartmentalized diﬀusion they assess (averaged)
diﬀusion across reﬂecting barriers in the ﬁrst case and diﬀusion within compartments
in the second case. From this, their characteristic diﬀusion laws can be empirically
deduced. Henceforth, a possible mathematical visualization of the diﬀusion law for
trapping diﬀusion is described.
Let S be a two-dimensional heterogeneous surface with area A where identical par-
ticles can diﬀuse. Namely, S has certain regions where the viscosity is v1, others where
viscosity is v2 and so on. Because the diﬀusing particles are identical, their diﬀusion
47
4. TRANSIENT TRAPPING OF PLASMA MEMBRANE MOLECULES
coeﬃcient will depend only on the viscosity of the speciﬁc region where they diﬀuse,
acquiring corresponding diﬀusion coeﬃcients D1, D2, and so on. Possible schemes for
S are as follows:
Figure 4.6: Possible partitions for a two-dimensional heterogeneous surface -
The surface, of total area A, is subdivided in small squares of area a, where diﬀerent colors
stand for diﬀerent viscosities.
We assume here that the domains with diﬀerent viscosities in S are immobile. Let us
suppose now that we can perform FCS measurements in areas which are much smaller
than the domains, i.e., each one of these small areas has homogeneous viscosity. Let a
stand for such small area, such that A/a = m. All the correspondent FCS experiments
would then only probe free diﬀusion, though providing diﬀerent lateral diﬀusion times,
due to diﬀerent viscosities. The average of the lateral diﬀusion time over the whole
area then would be calculated as
⟨τa⟩ ∝ 1
m
X
x
X
y

a
D(x, y)

(4.1)
where the diﬀusion coeﬃcient D depends only on the coordinates x, y of the center
of the square being measured. Each measurement corresponds to each small square,
which is the step size of this “scanning” procedure. Eq. (4.1) can also be written as
⟨τa⟩ ∝

a
D(x, y)

x,y
(4.2)
where the average over the space was deﬁned as below
⟨f(x, y)⟩x,y ≡ 1
m
X
x
X
y
f(x, y).
(4.3)
In order to form a perspective and compare two limiting situations, let us examine now
48
4.3 What is trapping? - Nanodomains and the diﬀusion law
the case where the probed area is much larger than the domains. In this case, the FCS
experiment “sees” the probed area as a homogeneous surface, not being able to detect
small islands of heterogeneity. If we then model this situation as a process where the
viscosity, and therefore eﬀective diﬀusion coeﬃcient through the probed area is being
averaged out, we should expect the lateral diﬀusion time to be
τA ∝
A
 P
x
P
y
D(x,y)
m
 =
A
⟨D(x, y)⟩x,y
=
ma
⟨D(x, y)⟩x,y
.
(4.4)
Eqs. (4.2) and (4.4) provide two results for the average transit time through the area
S, calculated by two diﬀerent types of experiment. In order to bridge a connection
between them, we would like to compare τA and m⟨τa⟩. For that purpose, we make use
of the Jensen inequality, which can be stated as follows95: if F(f(ε)) is a functional of
a function f(ε), then
⟨F(f(ε))⟩ε ≥ F (⟨f(ε)⟩ε)
(4.5)
if and only if F is a convex functional of f within the interval in which the average is
being calculated. Looking at the dependence of the transit diﬀusion time on the diﬀu-
sion coeﬃcient, and keeping in mind that the convexity of a curve depends exclusively
on the sign of its second derivative, we note that
∂2
∂D(x, y)2

1
D(x, y)

=
2
D(x, y)3 > 0 ∀D(x, y) > 0
(4.6)
meaning that the transit time is a convex function of the diﬀusion coeﬃcient for all
possible values of D(x, y). Therefore the inequality (4.5) is valid in any interval, where
we identify F as τ and f as D. Hence,

a
D(x, y)

x,y
≥
a
⟨D(x, y)⟩x,y
(4.7)
from where we have τA ≤ m⟨τa⟩ and therefore Dapp(A) ≥ ⟨Dapp(a)⟩, as indicated by
the trapping diﬀusion law.
Of much importance here is noting that the decrease in the average apparent diﬀu-
sion coeﬃcient observed in small areas is not a consequence of focusing the probed area
on the domains of hindered diﬀusion. Considering very small domains homogeneously
distributed, it would be possible that the percentage of the probed area occupied by the
domains is the same for the STED and conventional FCS experiments. What accounts
for the diﬀerence in the relative transit times and in the shape of the FCS curves is the
sensitivity of the experiment to diﬀerent degrees of heterogeneity.
49
4. TRANSIENT TRAPPING OF PLASMA MEMBRANE MOLECULES
50
5
Conclusions and outlook
In his ingenious “Allegory of the Cave”96 Plato suggests two sources of delusional
perception of reality: artefactual perceived images (stemming from the method of ob-
servation) and attribution of substantial meaning and functions to irrelevant eﬀects.
This idea ﬁnds direct resonance in the problems faced in plasma membrane research,
where the dynamic organization and manifold vital functions ascribed to the plasma
membrane are sought to be understood.
The investigation of molecular interactions in their native biological environment
is fundamentally limited by the method of observation, analogously to the uncertainty
principle in quantum mechanics. In this context, the observation of molecular inter-
actions in biological systems may always feature an artefactual component. This lim-
itation can be overcome by observing the same eﬀects by means of diﬀerent methods.
In this way, the genuine character of a phenomenon can be separated from artefactual
components. By observing lipid compartmentalized diﬀusion with a minimally inva-
sive probe via STED-FCS, the research presented in the chapter 3 constitutes the very
ﬁrst validation of the prominent picket fence model for plasma membrane organization
proposed by A. Kusumi about a decade ago26,27.
This model hypothesizes that lipids and proteins in the plasma membrane are par-
tially segregated into membrane compartments.
It has been the subject of intense
debate due to the fact that besides high-speed SPT, no other method has until now
provided supporting evidence for this hypothesis29. Even worse, the SPT experiments
reporting lipid compartmentalization employed exclusively artefact-prone lipid probes
(gold particles27 and quantum dots60) in order to achieve the required temporal reso-
lution. The artefactual character of these probes stems from the diﬃculty in validation
of their valence towards the target molecule, possibly inducing oligomerization. In the
early days of high-speed SPT, this problem was not regarded to be signiﬁcant97, since
the Saﬀman-Delbr¨uck hydrodynamic model predicts that mobility in the plasma mem-
brane has a weak, logarithmic dependence on the radius of the diﬀusing molecule10. A
51
5. CONCLUSIONS AND OUTLOOK
corollary from the Saﬀman-Delbr¨uck model is that oligomerization of molecules would
only slightly aﬀect their diﬀusion coeﬃcient. The very signiﬁcance of that hydrody-
namic model was however questioned in 2006, when an experimental study led by Y.
Gambin remarkably concluded that diﬀusion in membranes is not satisfactorily de-
scribed by the the Saﬀman-Delbr¨uck equation98 and that oligomerization signiﬁcantly
impacts membrane diﬀusion. These ﬁndings cast serious doubt on the results of stud-
ies on membrane dynamics which employ polyvalent probes suchs as gold particles and
quantum dots, and consequently render unfounded the initial evidence for the picket
fence model. Using STED-FCS, we were able to redeem the picket fence model by
observing compartmentalized diﬀusion of lipids with an alternative technique, utilizing
ﬂuorescent lipid analogues.
The picket fence model postulates the cortical actin networks to be ultimately re-
sponsible for lipid and protein compartmentalized diﬀusion. These cell networks cur-
rently lack well-established proteic markers, such that even the determination of their
speciﬁc localization within a cell constitutes a challenging task99. Interestingly, our
pioneer assessment of lipid diﬀusion upon Arp2/3 modulation pinpoints this protein as
a major regulator of cortical actin networks, as compartmentalized diﬀusion of lipids is
speciﬁcally suppressed by Arp2/3 inhibition.
Furthermore, lipid diﬀusion was assessed for the ﬁrst time in myelin sheets (see
chapter 4). Myelin sheets constitute a unique biological membrane which allows the
rapid impulse transmission in vertebrates. Having a peculiar lipid composition and
being supported by a meshwork of myelin basic protein, this membrane lacks cortical
actin networks. In this study, myelin sheets were found to exhibit peculiar diﬀusion
characteristics, where lipids tend to diﬀuse more freely than in the plasma membrane
of the epithelial cell PtK2. As it was shown in chapter 2, the actin cortex in PtK2
cells modulates lipid diﬀusion through Arp2/3-dependent networks. Importantly, upon
extrusion of cortical actin in PtK2 cells (by the introduction of platforms comprising a
meshwork of myelin basic protein) lipid diﬀusion was modulated by this new meshwork
instead.
This suggests myelin basic protein to be a modulator of lipid diﬀusion in
myelin membrane sheets.
Moreover, it corroborates the symbiotic character of the
plasma membrane with respect to the proteinaceous sub-membranous structure that
deﬁnes its morphology.
In another set of experiments, we observed Ras proteins, which are involved in
numerous important signalling pathways, and whose nanocluster properties are funda-
mental to their signalling function. Ras proteins were found to undergo diﬀusion in the
plasma membrane marked by trapping events. This diﬀusion pattern, consistent with
transient nanoclustering, was shown to be regulated by the nanocluster-scaﬀold protein
galectin-1. Furthermore, diﬀerent conformations of the Ras proteins allowed diﬀerent
susceptibilities to galectin-1 regulation. We assessed diﬀusion of diﬀerent conformers of
52
5.1 Plasma membrane dynamics: perspectives for future research
Ras in the plasma membrane, and observed speciﬁc nanocluster characteristics. From
these results, it follows that mutations aﬀecting the conformation of these signalling
proteins may also signiﬁcantly impact their function.
5.1
Plasma membrane dynamics: perspectives for future
research
Concerning the theoretical basis for the assessment of diﬀusion by STED-FCS, or spot-
variation FCS in general, the development of new theoretical strategies could broaden
the discernment of diﬀusion patterns by this method. In fact, the mathematical ana-
logue of diﬀusion, i.e. the general problem of random walk, has been intensively stud-
ied49. A recent study featured mathematically sophisticated implementations of ran-
domly placed barriers, partially inspired by the picket fence model100.
FCS is the
time-domain counterpart of SPT, and is analogous to the time-domain counterpart of
the random walk, namely, the classical gambler’s ruin problem from game theory101. In
this classical problem, the expected duration of the game is analogous to the average
transit time through the focal spot in FCS experiments. Analytical studies of spot-
variation FCS in this background could shed light on potential further applications
of this method. In particular, the current spot-variation FCS analysis (based on the
diﬀusion law52) is analogous to the assessment of the expected duration of the game
only. New insights could come from the assessment of the variance of the duration of
the game, for example.
A pitfall in plasma membrane research is the premature attribution of pivotal func-
tions to observed eﬀects, which may delay further scientiﬁc progress. For example, one
reason why the structural model of Danielli and Davson prevailed for such a long time
was because it was believed that the monolayer of proteins adsorbed onto both sides
of the lipid bilayer was essential to confer the required surface tension to the plasma
membrane. The lipid rafts hypothesis may have suﬀered the same fate, despite being
a milestone in plasma membrane research. Countless functions and fundamental im-
plications have been postulated related to these lipid domains, with drug resistance23
and increased levels of rafts in cancer cells102 being examples. Future research must
clarify whether or not these attributions were premature.
The validation of the picket fence model demonstrated in this work raises a new
important question, namely, the determination of the precise structural mechanisms
by which Arp2/3-dependent cortical actin networks exert compartmentalization in the
plasma membrane. The adhesion between the cortical cytoskeleton and the plasma
membrane is provided by speciﬁc lipids and proteins, in a cell type-dependent man-
ner103.
Investigation of lipid and protein diﬀusion upon modulation of membrane-
cytoskeleton adhesion may bring new insights into our understanding of plasma mem-
53
5. CONCLUSIONS AND OUTLOOK
brane organization.
The currently evolving picture of the plasma membrane will surely undergo many
interesting and exciting turns of events in the years to follow, especially concerning the
role of membrane dynamics in signal transduction pathways. This is because the ﬁrst
steps of signalling events take place at the plasma membrane, and deciphering their
details is fundamental to the understanding of some of the most important questions
concerning biological systems.
A highly complex system with intricate membrane-organizing principles, possibly
operating symbiotically with cortical actin networks and orchestrating dynamic tran-
sient assemblies of lipids and proteins shall emerge as an increasingly more comprehen-
sive concept.
54
References
[1] Gorter, E. and Grendel, F. On bimolecular layers of lipoids on the chromocytes of
the blood. The Journal of Experimental Medicine, 41(4):439–443, March 1925.
[2] Luzio, J.P. and Thompson, R.J. Molecular Medical Biochemistry. Cambridge University Press,
February 1990.
[3] Danielli, J.F. and Davson, H. A contribution to the theory of permeability of thin
ﬁlms. Journal of Cellular and Comparative Physiology, 5(4):495–508, 1935.
[4] Bernal, J.D. and Crowfoot, D. X-Ray Photographs of Crystalline Pepsin. Nature,
133:794–795, May 1934.
[5] Robertson, J.D. The Membrane of the Living Cell. Scientiﬁc American, 206(4):64–72,
April 1962.
[6] Singer, S.J. and Nicolson, G.L.
The ﬂuid mosaic model of the structure of cell
membranes. Science (New York, N.Y.), 175(4023):720–731, February 1972.
[7] Frye, L.D. and Edidin, M. The Rapid Intermixing of Cell Surface Antigens After For-
mation of Mouse-Human Heterokaryons. Journal of Cell Science, 7(2):319–335, September
1970.
[8] Pohl, S.L., Birnbaumer, L. and Rodbell, M. The Glucagon-sensitive Adenyl Cyclase
System in Plasma Membranes of Rat Liver I. PROPERTIES. Journal of Biological
Chemistry, 246(6):1849–1856, March 1971.
[9] Einstein, A. ¨Uber die von der molekularkinetischen Theorie der W¨arme geforderte
Bewegung von in ruhenden Fl¨ussigkeiten suspendierten Teilchen. Annalen der Physik,
17(8):549–560, May 1905.
[10] Saffman, P.G. and Delbr¨uck, M. Brownian motion in biological membranes. Proceed-
ings of the National Academy of Sciences, 72(8):3111–3113, August 1975.
[11] Magde, D., Elson, E. and Webb, W.W. Thermodynamic Fluctuations in a Reacting
System—Measurement by Fluorescence Correlation Spectroscopy.
Physical Review
Letters, 29(11):705–708, September 1972.
[12] Axelrod, D., Koppel, D.E., Schlessinger, J., Elson, E. and Webb, W.W. Mobility
measurement by analysis of ﬂuorescence photobleaching recovery kinetics. Biophysical
Journal, 16(9):1055–1069, September 1976.
55
REFERENCES
[13] Barak, L.S. and Webb, W.W. Fluorescent low density lipoprotein for observation
of dynamics of individual receptor complexes on cultured human ﬁbroblasts. The
Journal of Cell Biology, 90(3):595–604, September 1981.
[14] de Brabander, M., Nuydens, R., Ishihara, A., Holifield, B., Jacobson, K. and Geerts,
H. Lateral diﬀusion and retrograde movements of individual cell surface components
on single motile cells observed with Nanovid microscopy. The Journal of cell biology,
112(1):111–124, January 1991.
[15] Edidin, M., Kuo, S.C. and Sheetz, M.P.
Lateral movements of membrane gly-
coproteins restricted by dynamic cytoplasmic barriers.
Science (New York, N.Y.),
254(5036):1379–1382, November 1991.
[16] Kusumi, A., Sako, Y. and Yamamoto, M. Conﬁned lateral diﬀusion of membrane recep-
tors as studied by single particle tracking (nanovid microscopy). Eﬀects of calcium-
induced diﬀerentiation in cultured epithelial cells. Biophysical Journal, 65(5):2021–2040,
November 1993.
[17] Venkatakrishnan, G., McKinnon, C.A., Pilapil, C.G., Wolf, D.E. and Ross, A.H.
Nerve growth factor receptors are preaggregated and immobile on responsive cells.
Biochemistry, 30(11):2748–2753, January 1991.
[18] Meer, G.V. Lipid Traﬃc in Animal Cells. Annual Review of Cell Biology, 5(1):247–275,
1989.
[19] Rodriguez-Boulan, E. and Nelson, W.J. Morphogenesis of the polarized epithelial
cell phenotype. Science (New York, N.Y.), 245(4919):718–725, 1989.
[20] Simons, K. and Ikonen, E. Functional rafts in cell membranes. Nature, 387(6633):569–
572, June 1997.
[21] Hancock, J.F.
Lipid rafts:
contentious only from simplistic standpoints.
Nature
Reviews Molecular Cell Biology, 7(6):456–462, June 2006.
[22] Lingwood, D. and Simons, K.
Lipid Rafts As a Membrane-Organizing Principle.
Science, 327(5961):46–50, January 2010.
[23] Leslie, M. Do Lipid Rafts Exist? Science, 334(6059):1046–1047, November 2011.
[24] Simons, K. and Ehehalt, R. Cholesterol, lipid rafts, and disease. Journal of Clinical
Investigation, 110(5):597–603, September 2002.
[25] Munro, S. Lipid Rafts: Elusive or Illusive? Cell, 115(4):377–388, November 2003.
[26] Kusumi, A., Nakada, C., Ritchie, K., Murase, K., Suzuki, K., Murakoshi, H., Kasai,
R.S., Kondo, J. and Fujiwara, T. Paradigm shift of the plasma membrane concept
from the two-dimensional continuum ﬂuid to the partitioned ﬂuid: high-speed single-
molecule tracking of membrane molecules. Annual Review of Biophysics and Biomolecular
Structure, 34(1):351–378, 2005.
[27] Fujiwara, T., Ritchie, K., Murakoshi, H., Jacobson, K. and Kusumi, A. Phospholipids
undergo hop diﬀusion in compartmentalized cell membrane. The Journal of Cell Biology,
157(6):1071–1082, June 2002.
56
REFERENCES
[28] Kusumi, A., Fujiwara, T.K., Chadda, R., Xie, M., Tsunoyama, T.A., Kalay, Z., Kasai,
R.S. and Suzuki, K.G. Dynamic Organizing Principles of the Plasma Membrane that
Regulate Signal Transduction: Commemorating the Fortieth Anniversary of Singer
and Nicolson’s Fluid-Mosaic Model. Annual Review of Cell and Developmental Biology,
28(1):215–250, 2012.
[29] Abbott, A. Cell biology: Hopping fences. Nature, 433(7027):680–683, February 2005.
[30] Jacobson, K., Sheets, E.D. and Simson, R.
Revisiting the ﬂuid mosaic model of
membranes. Science, 268(5216):1441–1442, June 1995.
[31] Clausen, M.P. and Lagerholm, B.C.
The probe rules in single particle tracking.
Current protein & peptide science, 12(8):699–713, December 2011.
[32] Kusumi, A., Shirai, Y.M., Koyama-Honda, I., Suzuki, K.G. and Fujiwara, T.K.
Hi-
erarchical organization of the plasma membrane: Investigations by single-molecule
tracking vs. ﬂuorescence correlation spectroscopy. FEBS Letters, 584(9):1814–1823, May
2010.
[33] Gowrishankar, K., Ghosh, S., Saha, S., C., R., Mayor, S. and Rao, M. Active Re-
modeling of Cortical Actin Regulates Spatiotemporal Organization of Cell Surface
Molecules. Cell, 149(6):1353–1367, June 2012.
[34] Born, M. and Wolf, E. Principles of Optics. Cambridge University Press, Cambridge, 2002.
[35] Hell, S.W. and Wichmann, J.
Breaking the diﬀraction resolution limit by stimu-
lated emission: stimulated-emission-depletion ﬂuorescence microscopy. Optics letters,
19(11):780–782, June 1994.
[36] Hell, S.W.
Toward ﬂuorescence nanoscopy.
Nature Biotechnology, 21(11):1347–1355,
November 2003.
[37] Hell, S.W. Microscopy and its focal switch. Nature Methods, 6(1):24–32, January 2009.
[38] Harke, B., Keller, J., Ullal, C.K., Westphal, V., Sch¨onle, A. and Hell, S.W. Reso-
lution scaling in STED microscopy. Optics Express, 16(6):4154–4162, March 2008.
[39] Hell, S.W. Far-Field Optical Nanoscopy. Science, 316(5828):1153–1158, May 2007.
[40] Willig, K.I., Kellner, R.R., Medda, R., Hein, B., Jakobs, S. and Hell, S.W. Nanoscale
resolution in GFP-based microscopy. Nature Methods, 3(9):721–723, September 2006.
[41] Donnert, G., Keller, J., Medda, R., Andrei, M.A., Rizzoli, S.O., L¨uhrmann, R., Jahn,
R., Eggeling, C. and Hell, S.W. Macromolecular-scale resolution in biological ﬂuo-
rescence microscopy. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences, 103(31):11440–11445,
August 2006.
[42] Berning, S., Willig, K.I., Steffens, H., Dibaj, P. and Hell, S.W.
Nanoscopy in a
Living Mouse Brain. Science, 335(6068):551–551, February 2012.
[43] G¨ottfert, F., Wurm, C.A., Mueller, V., Berning, S., Cordes, V.C., Honigmann, A.
and Hell, S.W. Coaligned Dual-Channel STED Nanoscopy and Molecular Diﬀusion
Analysis at 20 nm Resolution. Biophysical Journal, 105(1):L01–L03, July 2013.
57
REFERENCES
[44] Eggeling, C. et al. Direct observation of the nanoscale dynamics of membrane lipids
in a living cell. Nature, 457(7233):1159–1162, February 2009.
[45] Kastrup, L., Blom, H., Eggeling, C. and Hell, S.W. Fluorescence Fluctuation Spec-
troscopy in Subdiﬀraction Focal Volumes. Physical Review Letters, 94(17):178104, May
2005.
[46] Ringemann, C., Harke, B., Middendorff, C.v., Medda, R., Honigmann, A., Wagner,
R., Leutenegger, M., Sch¨onle, A., Hell, S.W. and Eggeling, C. Exploring single-
molecule dynamics with ﬂuorescence nanoscopy. New Journal of Physics, 11(10):103054,
October 2009.
[47] Mueller, V., Ringemann, C., Honigmann, A., Schwarzmann, G., Medda, R., Leuteneg-
ger, M., Polyakova, S., Belov, V., Hell, S. and Eggeling, C.
STED Nanoscopy
Reveals Molecular Details of Cholesterol- and Cytoskeleton-Modulated Lipid Inter-
actions in Living Cells. Biophysical Journal, 101(7):1651–1660, October 2011.
[48] Mueller, V., Honigmann, A., Ringemann, C., Medda, R., Schwarzmann, G. and
Eggeling, C. Chapter One - FCS in STED Microscopy: Studying the Nanoscale
of Lipid Membrane Dynamics. In Sergey Y. Tetin, editor, Methods in Enzymology, Vol-
ume 519 of Fluorescence Fluctuation Spectroscopy (FFS), Part B, pages 1–38. Academic Press,
2013.
[49] Chandrasekhar, S. Stochastic Problems in Physics and Astronomy. Reviews of Modern
Physics, 15(1):1–89, January 1943.
[50] Elson, E.L. and Magde, D. Fluorescence correlation spectroscopy. I. Conceptual basis
and theory. Biopolymers, 13(1):1–27, 1974.
[51] Van Orden, A., Fogarty, K. and Jung, J. Fluorescence ﬂuctuation spectroscopy: a
coming of age story. Applied spectroscopy, 58(5):122A–137A, May 2004.
[52] Wawrezinieck, L., Rigneault, H., Marguet, D. and Lenne, P.F. Fluorescence Corre-
lation Spectroscopy Diﬀusion Laws to Probe the Submicron Cell Membrane Orga-
nization. Biophysical Journal, 89(6):4029–4042, December 2005.
[53] He, H.T. and Marguet, D.
Detecting Nanodomains in Living Cell Membrane by
Fluorescence Correlation Spectroscopy. Annual Review of Physical Chemistry, 62(1):417–
436, 2011.
[54] Murase, K., Fujiwara, T., Umemura, Y., Suzuki, K., Iino, R., Yamashita, H., Saito, M.,
Murakoshi, H., Ritchie, K. and Kusumi, A. Ultraﬁne Membrane Compartments for
Molecular Diﬀusion as Revealed by Single Molecule Techniques. Biophysical Journal,
86(6):4075–4093, June 2004.
[55] Mennicke, U. and Salditt, T. Preparation of Solid-Supported Lipid Bilayers by Spin-
Coating. Langmuir, 18(21):8172–8177, October 2002.
[56] Xu, K., Babcock, H.P. and Zhuang, X.
Dual-objective STORM reveals three-
dimensional ﬁlament organization in the actin cytoskeleton. Nature Methods, 9(2):185–
188, February 2012.
58
REFERENCES
[57] Lukinaviˇcius, G. et al.
A near-infrared ﬂuorophore for live-cell super-resolution
microscopy of cellular proteins. Nature Chemistry, 5(2):132–139, February 2013.
[58] Engelman, D.M. Membranes are more mosaic than ﬂuid. Nature, 438(7068):578–580,
December 2005.
[59] Kwik, J., Boyle, S., Fooksman, D., Margolis, L., Sheetz, M.P. and Edidin, M. Mem-
brane cholesterol, lateral mobility, and the phosphatidylinositol 4,5-bisphosphate-
dependent organization of cell actin.
Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences,
100(24):13964–13969, November 2003.
[60] Clausen, M.P. and Lagerholm, B.C. Visualization of Plasma Membrane Compart-
mentalization by High-Speed Quantum Dot Tracking. Nano Letters, 13(6):2332–2337,
June 2013.
[61] Heinemann, F., Vogel, S.K. and Schwille, P. Lateral Membrane Diﬀusion Modulated
by a Minimal Actin Cortex. Biophysical Journal, 104(7):1465–1475, April 2013.
[62] Lillemeier, B.F., Pfeiffer, J.R., Surviladze, Z., Wilson, B.S. and Davis, M.M. Plasma
membrane-associated proteins are clustered into islands attached to the cytoskele-
ton. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences, 103(50):18992–18997, December 2006.
[63] Sachs, F. Stretch-Activated Ion Channels: What Are They? Physiology, 25(1):50–56,
February 2010.
[64] Wieser, S., Moertelmaier, M., Fuertbauer, E., Stockinger, H. and Sch¨utz, G.J.
(Un)Conﬁned Diﬀusion of CD59 in the Plasma Membrane Determined by High-
Resolution Single Molecule Microscopy.
Biophysical Journal, 92(10):3719–3728,
May
2007.
[65] Adler, J., Shevchuk, A.I., Novak, P., Korchev, Y.E. and Parmryd, I. Plasma mem-
brane topography and interpretation of single-particle tracks. Nature Methods, 7(3):170–
171, March 2010.
[66] Wu, C., Asokan, S.B., Berginski, M.E., Haynes, E.M., Sharpless, N.E., Griffith, J.D.,
Gomez, S.M. and Bear, J.E. Arp2/3 Is Critical for Lamellipodia and Response to
Extracellular Matrix Cues but Is Dispensable for Chemotaxis. Cell, 148(5):973–987,
March 2012.
[67] Nolen, B.J., Tomasevic, N., Russell, A., Pierce, D.W., Jia, Z., McCormick, C.D.,
Hartman, J., Sakowicz, R. and Pollard, T.D. Characterization of two classes of small
molecule inhibitors of Arp2/3 complex. Nature, 460(7258):1031–1034, August 2009.
[68] Rotty, J.D., Wu, C. and Bear, J.E. New insights into the regulation and cellular
functions of the ARP2/3 complex.
Nature Reviews Molecular Cell Biology, 14(1):7–12,
January 2013.
[69] Goley, E.D. and Welch, M.D. The ARP2/3 complex: an actin nucleator comes of
age. Nature Reviews Molecular Cell Biology, 7(10):713–726, October 2006.
[70] Yi, K., Unruh, J.R., Deng, M., Slaughter, B.D., Rubinstein, B. and Li, R. Dynamic
maintenance of asymmetric meiotic spindle position through Arp2/3-complex-driven
cytoplasmic streaming in mouse oocytes. Nature Cell Biology, 13(10):1252–1258, October
2011.
59
REFERENCES
[71] Chaigne, A. et al. A soft cortex is essential for asymmetric spindle positioning in
mouse oocytes. Nature Cell Biology, 15(8):958–966, August 2013.
[72] Zhou, K., Muroyama, A., Underwood, J., Leylek, R., Ray, S., Soderling, S.H. and
Lechler, T. Actin-related protein2/3 complex regulates tight junctions and terminal
diﬀerentiation to promote epidermal barrier formation.
Proceedings of the National
Academy of Sciences, page 201308419, September 2013.
[73] Jaqaman, K., Kuwata, H., Touret, N., Collins, R., Trimble, W.S., Danuser, G. and
Grinstein, S. Cytoskeletal Control of CD36 Diﬀusion Promotes Its Receptor and
Signaling Function. Cell, 146(4):593–606, August 2011.
[74] Suzuki, K.G.N., Fujiwara, T.K., Sanematsu, F., Iino, R., Edidin, M. and Kusumi, A.
GPI-anchored receptor clusters transiently recruit Lyn and Gα for temporary cluster
immobilization and Lyn activation: single-molecule tracking study 1. The Journal of
Cell Biology, 177(4):717–730, May 2007.
[75] Sahl, S.J., Leutenegger, M., Hilbert, M., Hell, S.W. and Eggeling, C. Fast molecu-
lar tracking maps nanoscale dynamics of plasma membrane lipids. Proceedings of the
National Academy of Sciences, 107(15):6829–6834, April 2010.
[76] Suzuki, K.G.N., Kasai, R.S., Hirosawa, K.M., Nemoto, Y.L., Ishibashi, M., Miwa, Y.,
Fujiwara, T.K. and Kusumi, A. Transient GPI-anchored protein homodimers are units
for raft organization and function. Nature Chemical Biology, 8(9):774–783, September 2012.
[77] Suzuki, K.G.N., Fujiwara, T.K., Edidin, M. and Kusumi, A. Dynamic recruitment of
phospholipase Cγ at transiently immobilized GPI-anchored receptor clusters induces
IP3–Ca2+ signaling:
single-molecule tracking study 2.
The Journal of Cell Biology,
177(4):731–742, May 2007.
[78] Daumas, F., Destainville, N., Millot, C., Lopez, A., Dean, D. and Salom´e, L. Conﬁned
Diﬀusion Without Fences of a G-Protein-Coupled Receptor as Revealed by Single
Particle Tracking. Biophysical Journal, 84(1):356–366, January 2003.
[79] Mueller, V.J. Nanoscale studies of membrane dynamics via STED- Fluorescence Correlation
Spectroscopy. Dissertation, July 2012.
[80] Chepizhko, O. and Peruani, F. Diﬀusion, Subdiﬀusion, and Trapping of Active Par-
ticles in Heterogeneous Media. Physical Review Letters, 111(16):160604, October 2013.
[81] Morell, P. and Quarles, R.H. The Myelin Sheath, 1999.
[82] Hartline, D.K. What is myelin? Neuron Glia Biology, 4(02):153–163, 2008.
[83] Baumann, N. and Pham-Dinh, D. Biology of Oligodendrocyte and Myelin in the Mam-
malian Central Nervous System. Physiological Reviews, 81(2):871–927, April 2001.
[84] Aggarwal, S. et al. Myelin Membrane Assembly Is Driven by a Phase Transition of
Myelin Basic Proteins Into a Cohesive Protein Meshwork. PLoS Biol, 11(6):e1001577,
June 2013.
[85] Aggarwal, S. et al.
A Size Barrier Limits Protein Diﬀusion at the Cell Surface
to Generate Lipid-Rich Myelin-Membrane Sheets. Developmental Cell, 21(3):445–456,
September 2011.
60
REFERENCES
[86] Goodsell, D.S.
The Molecular Perspective:
The ras Oncogene.
The Oncologist,
4(3):263–264, June 1999.
[87] Downward, J. Targeting RAS signalling pathways in cancer therapy. Nature Reviews
Cancer, 3(1):11–22, January 2003.
[88] Pylayeva-Gupta, Y., Grabocka, E. and Bar-Sagi, D.
RAS oncogenes:
weaving a
tumorigenic web. Nature Reviews Cancer, 11(11):761–774, November 2011.
[89] Vetter, I.R. and Wittinghofer, A. The Guanine Nucleotide-Binding Switch in Three
Dimensions. Science, 294(5545):1299–1304, November 2001.
[90] Baker, N.M. and Der, C.J.
Cancer:
Drug for an ’undruggable’ protein.
Nature,
497(7451):577–578, May 2013.
[91] Janosi, L., Li, Z., Hancock, J.F. and Gorfe, A.A. Organization, dynamics, and segre-
gation of Ras nanoclusters in membrane domains. Proceedings of the National Academy
of Sciences, 109(21):8097–8102, May 2012.
[92] Belanis, L., Plowman, S.J., Rotblat, B., Hancock, J.F. and Kloog, Y. Galectin-1
Is a Novel Structural Component and a Major Regulator of H-Ras Nanoclusters.
Molecular Biology of the Cell, 19(4):1404–1414, April 2008.
[93] Tian, T., Harding, A., Inder, K., Plowman, S., Parton, R.G. and Hancock, J.F. Plasma
membrane nanoswitches generate high-ﬁdelity Ras signal transduction. Nature Cell
Biology, 9(8):905–914, August 2007.
[94] Abankwa, D., Gorfe, A.A., Inder, K. and Hancock, J.F. Ras membrane orientation
and nanodomain localization generate isoform diversity.
Proceedings of the National
Academy of Sciences, 107(3):1130–1135, January 2010.
[95] Andrade, D.M. and Hussein, M.S. Jensen inequalities for tunneling probabilities in
complex systems. Physical Review C, 80(3):034610, September 2009.
[96] Plato. The Republic. Penguin, London, 2007.
[97] Damjanovich, S., Edidin, M., Szollosi, J. and Tron, L. Mobility and Proximity in Biological
Membranes. Taylor & Francis, March 1994.
[98] Gambin, Y., Lopez-Esparza, R., Reffay, M., Sierecki, E., Gov, N.S., Genest, M.,
Hodges, R.S. and Urbach, W.
Lateral mobility of proteins in liquid membranes
revisited. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences of the United States of America,
103(7):2098–2102, February 2006.
[99] Salbreux, G., Charras, G. and Paluch, E. Actin cortex mechanics and cellular mor-
phogenesis. Trends in Cell Biology, 22(10):536–545, October 2012.
[100] Novikov, D.S., Fieremans, E., Jensen, J.H. and Helpern, J.A. Random walks with
barriers. Nature Physics, 7(6):508–514, June 2011.
[101] Feller, W. An introduction to probability theory and its applications. Volume I. J. Wiley &
sons, New York; London; Sydney, 1968.
61
REFERENCES
[102] Li, Y.C., Park, M.J., Ye, S.K., Kim, C.W. and Kim, Y.N. Elevated Levels of Cholesterol-
Rich Lipid Rafts in Cancer Cells Are Correlated with Apoptosis Sensitivity Induced
by Cholesterol-Depleting Agents. The American Journal of Pathology, 168(4):1107–1118,
April 2006.
[103] Sheetz, M.P., Sable, J.E. and D¨obereiner, H.G. Continuous Membrane-Cytoskeleton
Adhesion Requires Continuous Accommodation to Lipid and Cytoskeleton Dynam-
ics. Annual Review of Biophysics and Biomolecular Structure, 35(1):417–434, 2006.
62
Appendix A
P
value
for
com-
parison
between
(FWHM = 40 nm)
and (FWHM = 240
nm) data in the same
experiment
P value for compari-
son between (FWHM
= 240 nm) data and
control
experiment
(FWHM = 240 nm
data)
Untreated NRK cells (control)
<0.0001
N/A
COase-treated NRK cells
= 0.0105
= 0.1871
Blebbistatin-treated NRK cells
<0.0001
= 0.4113
LatB-treated NRK cells
= 0.0563
<0.0001
CK-666-treated NRK cells
= 0.8741
<0.0001
Untreated NRK cells (cell body)
= 0.0002
= 0.0224
Table A.1: List of P values for comparisons between results from STED-FCS
experiments in NRK cells, as determined by two-tailed unpaired t test
63
A.
P
value
for
com-
parison
between
(FWHM = 40 nm)
and (FWHM = 240
nm) data in the same
experiment
P value for compari-
son between (FWHM
= 240 nm) data and
control
experiment
(FWHM = 240 nm
data)
Untreated IA32 cells (control)
<0.0001
N/A
COase-treated IA32 cells
<0.0001
= 0.6046
Blebbistatin-treated IA32 cells
= 0.0005
= 0.6048
LatB-treated IA32 cells
= 0.0582
= 0.0210
CK-666-treated IA32 cells
= 0.4195
<0.0001
Untreated IA32 2xKD cells
= 0.1486
= 0.0190
Table A.2: List of P values for comparisons between results from STED-FCS
experiments in IA32 cells, as determined by two-tailed unpaired t test
64
Acknowledgements
I would like to thank Prof. Stefan W. Hell for having given me the fantas-
tic opportunity to work in the Nanobiophotonics Department at the Max
Planck Institute for Biophysical Chemistry, from whose outstanding scien-
tiﬁc environment I have beneﬁted so much. I am also very thankful to him
for fully supporting and encouraging my projects throughout the years of
my PhD.
I would like to thank Dr. Christian Eggeling for co-supervising my PhD.
I am deeply grateful for everything I have learned with this outstanding
scientist, scientiﬁc-wise or otherwise; to whom I will always be indebted
and who will always have my deepest respect.
I am very thankful to Prof.
J¨org Enderlein and Prof.
Erwin Neher for
composing my thesis committee, for being supportive and providing fruitful
discussions during the thesis committee meetings.
I thank as well the additional members of the examination board, Prof.
Helmut Grubm¨uller and Prof. Mikael Simons, for showing interest in my
work.
I am greatly indebted to all my collaborators, who added so much knowl-
edge and wisdom to my life.
Working with these various persons, from
various countries and with diverse scientiﬁc backgrounds, was certainly one
of the things I enjoyed most during my PhD. My special thanks to Mathias
Clausen, Olena Steshenko, Camilo Guzm´an, Virg´ınia Borroni, B. Christof-
fer Lagerholm and Jan Keller-Findeisen, who have changed the way I see
science and life in general.
Special thanks also to Marcel Leutenegger, who has shared with me a small
part of his great knowledge of so many things, and who was always willing
to help.
Thanks to Francisco Balzarotti, for being the best optical table-mate ever.
Thanks to Veronika Mueller and Alf Honigmann , for sharing with me part
of their knowledge and experience with STED-FCS, membrane dynamics,
general optics, etc, which certainly enriched my research.
Among the fundamentals to which the Nanobiophotonics group owes its
excellence is the outstanding team of engineers and technicians who make
unimaginable things possible. I am especially thankful to Tanja Gilat, Ellen
Rothermel, Jaydev Jethwa and Marco Roose, for bringing solutions to al-
most everything.
Thanks to Sebastian Schubert, Nicolai Urban, Christian Eggeling, Olena
Steshenko, Jaydev Jethwa and Alf Honigmann for proofreading parts of
this thesis.
I am especially indebted to my future husband, Sebastian Schubert, for
having supported me unconditionally through the time of my PhD, in all
possible ways. Para vocˆe, o meu sim.
Finally, I would like to deeply thank my family, especially my parents and
grandparents, to whom this thesis is dedicated, for having paved my way
for the search of knowledge.
Curriculum Vitae 
 
Name:  
Débora Machado Andrade 
Address:  
Zur Hohen Warte 21, 37077 Göttingen, Germany 
Telephone: 
+49-551-201-2515 
Email: 
dmachad@gwdg.de 
Date and place of birth: 
22.05.1984, Aracaju, Brazil 
Nationality: 
Brazilian 
Marital status: 
single 
Education 
05/2002 – 05/2006 
University of Sergipe, São Cristóvão, Sergipe, Brazil 
Bachelor of Science in Physics 
 
Bachelor’s thesis: "On the two-dimensional Hubbard model in different lattice geometries" 
Supervisor: Prof. Dr. Cláudio Andrade Macedo 
08/2006 – 09/2009 
University of São Paulo (USP), São Paulo, Brazil  
 
Master of Science in Physics 
 
Master’s thesis: "Jensen’s inequality applied to probabilities of nuclear fusion" 
Supervisor: Prof. Dr. Mahir Saleh Hussein 
10/2007 – 12/2007 
Max Planck Institute for Physics of Complex Systems (MPI-PKS), Dresden, Germany 
Research: Effects of Medium on Quantum Tunneling, under the supervision of Prof. Dr. Mahir 
Saleh Hussein (Martin Gutzwiller Fellow at MPI-PKS in 2007-2008). 
Since 07/2010 
International Max Planck Research School for Physics of Biological and Complex 
Systems of the Max Planck Institute for Biophysical Chemistry (MPIbpc) and the 
University of Göttingen, Göttingen, Germany 
PhD Student at the Department of NanoBiophotonics at the MPIbpc (Prof. Dr. Stefan W. Hell) 
Fellowships 
2004 – 2006  
University of Sergipe, São Cristóvão, Sergipe, Brazil 
Undergraduate Research Fellowship of the Institute of Physics 
2006 – 2010  
University of São Paulo (USP), São Paulo, Brazil 
Graduate Research Fellowship of the Department of Mathematical Physics 
Since 07/2010 
Max Planck Institute for Biophysical Chemistry, Göttingen, Germany 
PhD Fellowship (from 11/2010 to 10/2012: Max Planck Society IMPRS-PBCS fellowship) 
Awards 
1999 
Brazilian National Physics Olympiad for High School Students 
Gold Medal 
2009 
Brazilian Society of Physics 
Poster Prize at Jorge André Swieca Summer School on Theoretical Nuclear Physics for the 
poster “Jensen inequality applied to the probability of quantum tunneling and to the fusion of 
heavy ions” 
2012 
British Biophysical Society 
Poster Prize at Faraday Discussion 161 – Lipids and Membrane Biophysics for the poster 
“Lipid compartmentalization at the plasma membrane” 
 
 
 
 
Débora Machado Andrade 
 
 
 
 
Further Practical Experience 
09/2004 – 12/2004 
University of Sergipe, São Cristóvão, Sergipe, Brazil 
Teaching assistant of Prof. Dr. André Maurício Conceição de Souza at the Institute of Physics 
 
Task: Preparing the teaching material and teaching classes to the course “Introduction to 
Physics” as part of a graduation program on agronomy especially developed by the University 
of Sergipe for landless workers. 
04/2010 – 05/2010 
Institute for Research in Biomedicine (IRB), Bellinzona, Switzerland 
Internship 
 
Task: Supporting cell biology/immunology researchers in conducting experiments. 
Other abilities 
Languages 
Portuguese (mother tongue), English (fluent in written and spoken; TOEFL IBT: 103 out of 
120), Spanish (basics), French (basics), German (basics) 
Computer 
Fortran (good knowledge), Latex (basics), Microsoft Office (MS Word, MS Excel, MS 
PowerPoint), Adobe Illustrator (good knowledge) 
Publications 
2009 
Andrade, D.M.; Hussein, M.S.: Jensen inequalities for tunneling probabilities in complex 
systems. Phys. Rev. C80 034610, 2009. 
Submitted 
Guzmán, C.; Šolman, M.; Ligabue, A.; Blaževitš, O.; Andrade, D.M.; Reymond, L.; Eggeling, 
C.; Abankwa, D.: H-ras membrane-conformers allosterically couple to differentially Raf-
recruitment through nanoclustering. 
In preparation 
Andrade, D.M.; Clausen, M.P.; Keller, J.; Mueller, V.; Göttfert, F.; Wu, C.; Bear, J.E.; Hell, 
S.W.; Lagerholm, B.C.; Eggeling, C.: Lipids are compartmentalized at the plasma membrane 
by Arp2/3-dependent cortical actin networks. 
In preparation 
Steshenko, O.; Andrade, D.M.; Mueller, V.; Hell, S.W.; Eggeling, C.; Simons, M. Myelin-basic 
protein modulates lipid diffusion in myelin membrane sheets. 
Conferences / Workshops 
01/2009  
Andrade, D.M.; Hussein, M.S.: Jensen inequality applied to the probability of quantum 
tunneling and to the fusion of heavy ions. Poster at XIV Jorge André Swieca Summer School 
on Theoretical Nuclear Physics. Itaipava, Brazil 
09/2009 
Andrade, D.M.; Hussein, M.S.: Jensen inequalities for tunneling probabilities in complex 
systems. Poster at the International Workshop and Seminar on Tunneling and Scattering in 
Complex Systems. Dresden, Germany 
06/2012 
Andrade, D.M.; Hell, S.W.; Eggeling, C.: Cell membrane inhomogeneity unraveled by STED-
FCS. Oral presentation at 7th Annual Biphysics PhD Meeting. Holbæk, Denmark 
09/2012 
Andrade, D.M.; Clausen, M.P.; Lagerholm, C.B.; Hell, S.W.; Eggeling, C.: Lipid 
compartmentalization at the plasma membrane. Poster at the Faraday Discussion 161 – 
Lipids and Membrane Biophysics. London, England 
02/2013 
Andrade, D.M.; Clausen, M.P.; Lagerholm, C.B.; Hell, S.W.; Eggeling, C.: Lipid hop diffusion 
on the plasma membrane – a STED-FCS investigation. Oral presentation at Biophysical 
Society 57th Annual Meeting. Philadelphia, United States 
 
 
Göttingen, November 27th, 2013 
 
